So what does all this mean for us?
Even though technology is creating this isolation, we could use it to make the world connected again by breaking the existing model and going beyond it.
By exploring how we interface with these technologies, we could step out of our habitual, almost machine-like behavior and finally find common ground between each other.
Technology is never neutral.
It provides a context and frames reality.
It's part of the problem and part of the solution.
We could use it to uncover our blind spots and retrain our perception and consequently, choose how we see each other.
Thank you.
(Applause)
At the break, I was asked by several people about my comments about the aging debate.
And this will be my only comment on it.
And that is, I understand that optimists greatly outlive pessimists.
(Laughter) What I'm going to tell you about in my 18 minutes is how we're about to switch from reading the genetic code to the first stages of beginning to write the code ourselves.
It's only 10 years ago this month when we published the first sequence of a free-living organism, that of haemophilus influenzae.
That took a genome project from 13 years down to four months.
We can now do that same genome project in the order of two to eight hours.
So in the last decade, a large number of genomes have been added: most human pathogens, a couple of plants, several insects and several mammals, including the human genome.
Genomics at this stage of the thinking from a little over 10 years ago was, by the end of this year, we might have between three and five genomes sequenced; it's on the order of several hundred.
We just got a grant from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation to sequence 130 genomes this year, as a side project from environmental organisms.
So the rate of reading the genetic code has changed.
But as we look, what's out there, we've barely scratched the surface on what is available on this planet.
Most people don't realize it, because they're invisible, but microbes make up about a half of the Earth's biomass, whereas all animals only make up about one one-thousandth of all the biomass.
And maybe it's something that people in Oxford don't do very often, but if you ever make it to the sea, and you swallow a mouthful of seawater, keep in mind that each milliliter has about a million bacteria and on the order of 10 million viruses.
Less than 5,000 microbial species have been characterized as of two years ago, and so we decided to do something about it.
And we started the Sorcerer II Expedition, where we were, as with great oceanographic expeditions, trying to sample the ocean every 200 miles.
We started in Bermuda for our test project, then moved up to Halifax, working down the U.S. East Coast, the Caribbean Sea, the Panama Canal, through to the Galapagos, then across the Pacific, and we're in the process now of working our way across the Indian Ocean.
It's very tough duty; we're doing this on a sailing vessel, in part to help excite young people about going into science.
The experiments are incredibly simple.
We just take seawater and we filter it, and we collect different size organisms on different filters, and then take their DNA back to our lab in Rockville, where we can sequence a hundred million letters of the genetic code every 24 hours.
And with doing this, we've made some amazing discoveries.
For example, it was thought that the visual pigments that are in our eyes -- there was only one or two organisms in the environment that had these same pigments.
It turns out, almost every species in the upper parts of the ocean in warm parts of the world have these same photoreceptors, and use sunlight as the source of their energy and communication.
From one site, from one barrel of seawater, we discovered 1.3 million new genes and as many as 50,000 new species.
We've extended this to the air now with a grant from the Sloan Foundation.
We're measuring how many viruses and bacteria all of us are breathing in and out every day, particularly on airplanes or closed auditoriums.
(Laughter) We filter through some simple apparatuses; we collect on the order of a billion microbes from just a day filtering on top of a building in New York City.
And we're in the process of sequencing all that at the present time.
Just on the data collection side, just where we are through the Galapagos, we're finding that almost every 200 miles, we see tremendous diversity in the samples in the ocean.
Some of these make logical sense, in terms of different temperature gradients.
So this is a satellite photograph based on temperatures -- red being warm, blue being cold -- and we found there's a tremendous difference between the warm water samples and the cold water samples, in terms of abundant species.
The other thing that surprised us quite a bit is these photoreceptors detect different wavelengths of light, and we can predict that based on their amino acid sequence.
And these vary tremendously from region to region.
Maybe not surprisingly, in the deep ocean, where it's mostly blue, the photoreceptors tend to see blue light.
When there's a lot of chlorophyll around, they see a lot of green light.
But they vary even more, possibly moving towards infrared and ultraviolet in the extremes.
Just to try and get an assessment of what our gene repertoire was, we assembled all the data -- including all of ours thus far from the expedition, which represents more than half of all the gene data on the planet -- and it totaled around 29 million genes.
And we tried to put these into gene families to see what these discoveries are: Are we just discovering new members of known families, or are we discovering new families?
And it turns out we have about 50,000 major gene families, but every new sample we take in the environment adds in a linear fashion to these new families.
So we're at the earliest stages of discovery about basic genes, components and life on this planet.
When we look at the so-called evolutionary tree, we're up on the upper right-hand corner with the animals.
Of those roughly 29 million genes, we only have around 24,000 in our genome.
And if you take all animals together, we probably share less than 30,000 and probably maybe a dozen or more thousand different gene families.
I view that these genes are now not only the design components of evolution.
And we think in a gene-centric view -- maybe going back to Richard Dawkins' ideas -- than in a genome-centric view, which are different constructs of these gene components.
Synthetic DNA, the ability to synthesize DNA, has changed at sort of the same pace that DNA sequencing has over the last decade or two, and is getting very rapid and very cheap.
Our first thought about synthetic genomics came when we sequenced the second genome back in 1995, and that from mycoplasma genitalium.
And we have really nice T-shirts that say, you know, "I heart my genitalium."
This is actually just a microorganism.
But it has roughly 500 genes.
Haemophilus had 1,800 genes.
And we simply asked the question, if one species needs 800, another 500, is there a smaller set of genes that might comprise a minimal operating system?
So we started doing transposon mutagenesis.
Transposons are just small pieces of DNA that randomly insert in the genetic code.
And if they insert in the middle of the gene, they disrupt its function.
So we made a map of all the genes that could take transposon insertions and we called those "non-essential genes."
But it turns out the environment is very critical for this, and you can only define an essential or non-essential gene based on exactly what's in the environment.
We also tried to take a more directly intellectual approach with the genomes of 13 related organisms, and we tried to compare all of those, to see what they had in common.
And we got these overlapping circles. And we found only 173 genes common to all 13 organisms.
The pool expanded a little bit if we ignored one intracellular parasite; it expanded even more when we looked at core sets of genes of around 310 or so.
So we think that we can expand or contract genomes, depending on your point of view here, to maybe 300 to 400 genes from the minimal of 500.
The only way to prove these ideas was to construct an artificial chromosome with those genes in them, and we had to do this in a cassette-based fashion.
We found that synthesizing accurate DNA in large pieces was extremely difficult.
Ham Smith and Clyde Hutchison, my colleagues on this, developed an exciting new method that allowed us to synthesize a 5,000-base pair virus in only a two-week period that was 100 percent accurate, in terms of its sequence and its biology.
It was a quite exciting experiment -- when we just took the synthetic piece of DNA, injected it in the bacteria and all of a sudden, that DNA started driving the production of the virus particles that turned around and then killed the bacteria.
This was not the first synthetic virus -- a polio virus had been made a year before -- but it was only one ten-thousandth as active and it took three years to do.
This is a cartoon of the structure of phi X 174.
This is a case where the software now builds its own hardware, and that's the notions that we have with biology.
People immediately jump to concerns about biological warfare, and I had recent testimony before a Senate committee, and a special committee the U.S. government has set up to review this area.
And I think it's important to keep reality in mind, versus what happens with people's imaginations.
Basically, any virus that's been sequenced today -- that genome can be made.
And people immediately freak out about things about Ebola or smallpox, but the DNA from this organism is not infective.
So even if somebody made the smallpox genome, that DNA itself would not cause infections.
The real concern that security departments have is designer viruses.
And there's only two countries, the U.S. and the former Soviet Union, that had major efforts on trying to create biological warfare agents.
If that research is truly discontinued, there should be very little activity on the know-how to make designer viruses in the future.
I think single-cell organisms are possible within two years.
And possibly eukaryotic cells, those that we have, are possible within a decade.
So we're now making several dozen different constructs, because we can vary the cassettes and the genes that go into this artificial chromosome.
The key is, how do you put all of the others?
We start with these fragments, and then we have a homologous recombination system that reassembles those into a chromosome.
This is derived from an organism, deinococcus radiodurans, that can take three million rads of radiation and not be killed.
It reassembles its genome after this radiation burst in about 12 to 24 hours, after its chromosomes are literally blown apart.
This organism is ubiquitous on the planet, and exists perhaps now in outer space due to all our travel there.
This is a glass beaker after about half a million rads of radiation.
The glass started to burn and crack, while the microbes sitting in the bottom just got happier and happier.
Here's an actual picture of what happens: the top of this shows the genome after 1.7 million rads of radiation.
The chromosome is literally blown apart.
And here's that same DNA automatically reassembled 24 hours later.
It's truly stunning that these organisms can do that, and we probably have thousands, if not tens of thousands, of different species on this planet that are capable of doing that.
After these genomes are synthesized, the first step is just transplanting them into a cell without a genome.
So we think synthetic cells are going to have tremendous potential, not only for understanding the basis of biology but for hopefully environmental and society issues.
For example, from the third organism we sequenced, Methanococcus jannaschii -- it lives in boiling water temperatures; its energy source is hydrogen and all its carbon comes from CO2 it captures back from the environment.
So we know lots of different pathways, thousands of different organisms now that live off of CO2, and can capture that back.
So instead of using carbon from oil for synthetic processes, we have the chance of using carbon and capturing it back from the atmosphere, converting that into biopolymers or other products.
We have one organism that lives off of carbon monoxide, and we use as a reducing power to split water to produce hydrogen and oxygen.
Also, there's numerous pathways that can be engineered metabolizing methane.
And DuPont has a major program with Statoil in Norway to capture and convert the methane from the gas fields there into useful products.
Within a short while, I think there's going to be a new field called "Combinatorial Genomics," because with these new synthesis capabilities, these vast gene array repertoires and the homologous recombination, we think we can design a robot to make maybe a million different chromosomes a day.
And therefore, as with all biology, you get selection through screening, whether you're screening for hydrogen production, or chemical production, or just viability.
To understand the role of these genes is going to be well within reach.
We're trying to modify photosynthesis to produce hydrogen directly from sunlight.
Photosynthesis is modulated by oxygen, and we have an oxygen-insensitive hydrogenase that we think will totally change this process.
We're also combining cellulases, the enzymes that break down complex sugars into simple sugars and fermentation in the same cell for producing ethanol.
Pharmaceutical production is already under way in major laboratories using microbes.
The chemistry from compounds in the environment is orders of magnitude more complex than our best chemists can produce.
I think future engineered species could be the source of food, hopefully a source of energy, environmental remediation and perhaps replacing the petrochemical industry.
Let me just close with ethical and policy studies.
We delayed the start of our experiments in 1999 until we completed a year-and-a-half bioethical review as to whether we should try and make an artificial species.
Every major religion participated in this.
It was actually a very strange study, because the various religious leaders were using their scriptures as law books, and they couldn't find anything in them prohibiting making life, so it must be OK. The only ultimate concerns were biological warfare aspects of this, but gave us the go ahead to start these experiments for the reasons we were doing them.
Right now the Sloan Foundation has just funded a multi-institutional study on this, to work out what the risk and benefits to society are, and the rules that scientific teams such as my own should be using in this area, and we're trying to set good examples as we go forward.
These are complex issues.
Except for the threat of bio-terrorism, they're very simple issues in terms of, can we design things to produce clean energy, perhaps revolutionizing what developing countries can do and provide through various simple processes.
Thank you very much.
So my grandfather told me when I was a little girl, "If you say a word often enough, it becomes you."
And having grown up in a segregated city, Baltimore, Maryland, I sort of use that idea to go around America with a tape recorder -- thank God for technology -- to interview people, thinking that if I walked in their words -- which is also why I don't wear shoes when I perform -- if I walked in their words, that I could sort of absorb America.
I was also inspired by Walt Whitman, who wanted to absorb America and have it absorb him.
So these four characters are going to be from that work that I've been doing for many years now, and well over, I don't know, a couple of thousand people I've interviewed.
Anybody out here old enough to know Studs Terkel, that old radio man?
So I thought he would be the perfect person to go to to ask about a defining moment in American history.
You know, he was "born in 1912, the year the Titanic sank, greatest ship every built. Hits the tip of an iceberg, and bam, it went down. It went down and I came up. Wow, some century."
(Laughter) So this is his answer about a defining moment in American history.
"Defining moment in American history, I don't think there's one; you can't say Hiroshima, that's a big one -- I can't think of any one moment I would say is a defining moment.
The gradual slippage -- 'slippage' is the word used by the people in Watergate, moral slippage -- it's a gradual kind of thing, combination of things.
You see, we also have the technology.
I say, less and less the human touch.
"Oh, let me kind of tell you a funny little play bit.
The Atlanta airport is a modern airport, and they should leave the gate there.
These trains that take you out to a concourse and on to a destination.
And these trains are smooth, and they're quiet and they're efficient.
And there's a voice on the train, you know the voice was a human voice.
You see in the old days we had robots, robots imitated humans.
Now we have humans imitating robots.
So we got this voice on this train: Concourse One: Omaha, Lincoln.
Concourse Two: Dallas, Fort Worth. Same voice.
Just as a train is about to go, a young couple rush in and they're just about to close the pneumatic doors.
And that voice, without losing a beat, says, 'Because of late entry, we're delayed 30 seconds.' Just then, everybody's looking at this couple with hateful eyes and the couple's going like this, you know, shrinking.
Well, I'd happened to have had a couple of drinks before boarding -- I do that to steel my nerves -- and so I imitate a train call, holding my hand on my -- 'George Orwell, your time has come,' you see.
Well, some of you are laughing. Everybody laughs when I say that, but not on this train. Silence.
And so suddenly they're looking at me.
So here I am with the couple, the three of us shrinking at the foot of Calvary about to be up, you know.
"Just then I see a baby, a little baby in the lap of a mother.
I know it's Hispanic because she's speaking Spanish to her companion.
So I'm going to talk to the baby. So I say to the baby, holding my hand over my mouth because my breath must be 100 proof, I say to the baby, 'Sir or Madam, what is your considered opinion of the human species?' And the baby looks, you know, the way babies look at you clearly, starts laughing, starts busting out with this crazy little laugh.
I say, 'Thank God for a human reaction, we haven't lost yet.' "But you see, the human touch, you see, it's disappearing.
You know, you see, you've got to question the official truth.
You know the thing that was so great about Mark Twain -- you know we honor Mark Twain, but we don't read him.
We read 'Huck Finn,' of course, we read 'Huck Finn' of course.
I mean, Huck, of course, was tremendous.
Remember that great scene on the raft, remember what Huck did?
You see, here's Huck; he's an illiterate kid; he's had no schooling, but there's something in him.
And the official truth, the truth was, the law was, that a black man was a property, was a thing, you see.
And Huck gets on the raft with a property named Jim, a slave, see.
And he hears that Jim is going to go and take his wife and kids and steal them from the woman who owns them, and Huck says, 'Ooh, oh my God, ooh, ooh -- that woman, that woman never did anybody any harm.
Ooh, he's going to steal; he's going to steal; he's going to do a terrible thing.' Just then, two slavers caught up, guys chasing slaves, looking for Jim.
'Anybody up on that raft with you?' Huck says, 'Yeah.' 'Is he black or white?' 'White.' And they go off.
And Huck said, 'Oh my God, oh my God, I lied, I lied, ooh, I did a terrible thing, did a terrible thing -- why do I feel so good?' "But it's the goodness of Huck, that stuff that Huck's been made of, you see, all been buried; it's all been buried.
So the human touch, you see, it's disappearing.
So you ask about a defining moment -- ain't no defining moment in American history for me.
It's an accretion of moments that add up to where we are now, where trivia becomes news.
And more and more, less and less awareness of the pain of the other.
Huh. You know, I don't know if you could use this or not, but I was quoting Wright Morris, a writer from Nebraska, who says, 'We're more and more into communications and less and less into communication.' Okay, kids, I got to scram, got to go see my cardiologist."
And that's Studs Terkel.
(Applause) So, talk about risk taking. I'm going to do somebody that nobody likes.
You know, most actors want to do characters that are likeable -- well, not always, but the notion, especially at a conference like this, I like to inspire people.
But since this was called "risk taking," I'm doing somebody who I never do, because she's so unlikeable that one person actually came backstage and told me to take her out of the show she was in.
And I'm doing her because I think we think of risk, at a conference like this, as a good thing.
But there are certain other connotations to the word "risk," and the same thing about the word "nature." What is nature?
Maxine Greene, who's a wonderful philosopher who's as old as Studs, and was the head of a philosophy -- great, big philosophy kind of an organization -- I went to her and asked her what are the two things that she doesn't know, that she still wants to know.
And she said, "Well, personally, I still feel like I have to curtsey when I see the president of my university.
And I still feel as though I've got to get coffee for my male colleagues, even though I've outlived most of them."
And she said, "And then intellectually, I don't know enough about the negative imagination.
And September 11th certainly taught us that that's a whole area we don't investigate."
So this piece is about a negative imagination.
It raises questions about what nature is, what Mother Nature is, and about what a risk can be.
And I got this in the Maryland Correctional Institute for Women.
Everything I do is word for word off a tape.
And I title things because I think people speak in organic poems, and this is called "A Mirror to Her Mouth."
And this is an inmate named Paulette Jenkins.
"I began to learn how to cover it up, because I didn't want nobody to know that this was happening in my home.
I want everybody to think we were a normal family.
I mean we had all the materialistic things, but that didn't make my children pain any less; that didn't make their fears subside.
I ran out of excuses about how we got black eyes and busted lips and bruises. I didn't had no more excuses.
And he beat me too. But that didn't change the fact that it was a nightmare for my family; it was a nightmare.
And I failed them dramatically, because I allowed it to go on and on and on.
"But the night that Myesha got killed -- and the intensity just grew and grew and grew, until one night we came home from getting drugs, and he got angry with Myesha, and he started beating her, and he put her in a bathtub. Oh, he would use a belt.
He had a belt because he had this warped perverted thing that Myesha was having sex with her little brother and they was fondling each other -- that would be his reason.
I'm just talking about the particular night that she died.
And so he put her in the bathtub, and I was in the bedroom with the baby.
"And four months before this happened, four months before Myesha died, I thought I could really fix this man. So I had a baby by him -- insane -- thinking that if I gave him his own kid, he would leave mine alone.
And it didn't work, didn't work.
And I ended up with three children, Houston, Myesha and Dominic, who was four months old when I came to jail.
"And I was in the bedroom. Like I said, he had her in the bathroom and he -- he -- every time he hit her, she would fall.
And she would hit her head on the tub. It happened continuously, repeatedly.
I could hear it, but I dared not to move. I didn't move.
I didn't even go and see what was happening.
I just sat there and listened.
And then he put her in the hallway.
He told her, just set there. And so she set there for about four or five hours.
And then he told her, get up.
And when she got up, she says she couldn't see.
Her face was bruised. She had a black eye.
All around her head was just swollen; her head was about two sizes of its own size.
I told him, 'Let her go to sleep.' He let her go to sleep.
"The next morning she was dead.
He went in to check on her for school, and he got very excited.
He says, 'She won't breathe.' I knew immediately that she was dead.
I didn't even want to accept the fact that she was dead, so I went in and I put a mirror to her mouth -- there was no thing, nothing, coming out of her mouth.
He said, he said, he said, 'We can't, we can't let nobody find out about this.' He say, 'You've got to help me.' I agree. I agree.
"I mean, I've been keeping a secret for years and years and years, so it just seemed like second hand to me, just to keep on keeping it a secret.
So we went to the mall and we told a police that we had, like, lost her, that she was missing.
We told a security guard that she was missing, though she wasn't missing.
And we told the security guard what we had put on her and we went home and we dressed her in exactly the same thing that we had told the security guard that we had put on her.
"And then we got the baby and my other child, and we drove out to, like, I-95.
I was so petrified and so numb, all I could look was in the rear-view mirror.
And he just laid her right on the shoulder of the highway.
My own child, I let that happen to."
So that's an investigation of the negative imagination.
(Applause) When I started this project called "On the Road: A Search For an American Character" with my tape recorder, I thought that I was going to go around America and find it in all its aspects -- bull riders, cowboys, pig farmers, drum majorettes -- but I sort of got tripped on race relations, because my first big show was a show about a race riot.
And so I went to both -- two race riots, one of which was the Los Angeles riot. And this next piece is from that.
Because this is what I would say I've learned the most about race relations, from this piece.
It's a kind of an aria, I would say, and in many tapes that I have.
Everybody knows that the Los Angeles riots happened because four cops beat up a black man named Rodney King.
It was captured on videotape -- technology -- and it was played all over the world.
Everybody thought the four cops would go to jail.
They did not, so there were riots.
And what a lot of people forget, is there was a second trial, ordered by George Bush, Sr.
And that trial came back with two cops going to jail and two cops declared innocent. I was at that trial.
And I mean, the people just danced in the streets because they were afraid there was going to be another riot.
Explosion of joy that this verdict had come back this way.
So there was a community that didn't -- the Korean-Americans, whose stores had been burned to the ground.
And so this woman, Mrs. Young-Soon Han, I suppose will have taught me the most that I have learned about race.
And she asks also a question that Studs talks about: this notion of the "official truth," to question the "official truth."
So what she's questioning here, she's taking a chance and questioning what justice is in society.
And this is called, "Swallowing the Bitterness."
"I used to believe America was the best.
I watched in Korea many luxurious Hollywood lifestyle movie.
I never saw any poor man, any black.
Until 1992, I used to believe America was the best -- I still do; I don't deny that because I am a victim.
But at the end of '92, when we were in such turmoil, and having all the financial problems, and all the mental problems, I began to really realize that Koreans are completely left out of this society and we are nothing.
Why? Why do we have to be left out?
We didn't qualify for medical treatment, no food stamp, no GR, no welfare, anything. Many African-Americans who never work got minimum amount of money to survive.
We didn't get any because we have a car and a house.
And we are high taxpayer. Where do I find justice?
"OK. OK? OK. OK.
Many African-Americans probably think that they won by the trial.
I was sitting here watching them the morning after the verdict, and all the day they were having a party, they celebrated, all of South Central, all the churches. And they say, 'Well, finally justice has been done in this society.' Well, what about victims' rights?
They got their rights by destroying innocent Korean merchants.
They have a lot of respect, as I do, for Dr. Martin King.
He is the only model for black community; I don't care Jesse Jackson.
He is the model of non-violence, non-violence -- and they would all like to be in his spirit.
"But what about 1992? They destroyed innocent people.
And I wonder if that is really justice for them, to get their rights in that way.
I was swallowing the bitterness, sitting here alone and watching them.
They became so hilarious, but I was happy for them.
I was glad for them. At least they got something back, OK.
Let's just forget about Korean victims and other victims who were destroyed by them.
They fought for their rights for over two centuries, and maybe because they sacrifice other minorities, Hispanic, Asian, we would suffer more in the mainstream.
That's why I understand; that's why I have a mixed feeling about the verdict.
"But I wish that, I wish that, I wish that I could be part of the enjoyment.
I wish that I could live together with black people.
But after the riot, it's too much difference.
The fire is still there. How do you say it? [Unclear].
Igniting, igniting, igniting fire. Igniting fire.
It's still there; it can burst out anytime."
Mrs. Young-Soon Han.
(Applause) The other reason that I don't wear shoes is just in case I really feel like I have to cuddle up and get into the feet of somebody, walking really in somebody else's shoes.
And I told you that in -- you know, I didn't give you the year, but in '79 I thought that I was going to go around and find bull riders and pig farmers and people like that, and I got sidetracked on race relations.
Finally, I did find a bull rider, two years ago.
And I've been going to the rodeos with him, and we've bonded.
And he's the lead in an op-ed I did about the Republican Convention.
He's a Republican -- I won't say anything about my party affiliation, but anyway -- so this is my dear, dear Brent Williams, and this is on toughness, in case anybody needs to know about being tough for the work that you do. I think there's a real lesson in this.
And this is called "Toughness."
"Well, I'm an optimist. I mean basically I'm an optimist.
I mean, you know, I mean, it's like my wife, Jolene, her family's always saying, you know, you ever think he's just a born loser?
It seems like he has so much bad luck, you know.
But then when that bull stepped on my kidney, you know, I didn't lose my kidney -- I could have lost my kidney, I kept my kidney, so I don't think I'm a born loser.
I think that's good luck.
(Laughter) "And, I mean, funny things like this happen.
I was in a doctor's office last CAT scan, and there was a Reader's Digest, October 2002.
It was like, 'seven ways to get lucky.' And it says if you want to get lucky, you know, you've got to be around positive people.
I mean, like even when I told my wife that you want to come out here and talk to me, she's like, 'She's just talking; she's just being nice to you. She's not going to do that.' "And then you called me up and you said you wanted to come out here and interview me and she went and looked you up on the Internet.
She said, 'Look who she is.
You're not even going to be able to answer her questions.' (Laughter) And she was saying you're going to make me look like an idiot because I've never been to college, and I wouldn't be talking professional or anything.
I said, 'Well look, the woman talked to me for four hours.
You know, if I wasn't talking -- you know, like, you know, she wanted me to talk, I don't think she would even come out here.' "Confidence? Well, I think I ride more out of determination than confidence.
I mean, confidence is like, you know, you've been on that bull before; you know you can ride him.
I mean, confidence is kind of like being cocky, but in a good way.
But determination, you know, it's like just, you know, 'Fuck the form, get the horn.' (Laughter) That's Tuff Hedeman, in the movie '8 Seconds.' I mean, like, Pat O'Mealey always said when I was a boy, he say, 'You know, you got more try than any kid I ever seen.' And try and determination is the same thing.
Determination is, like, you're going to hang on that bull, even if you're riding upside down.
Determination's like, you're going to ride till your head hits the back of the dirt.
"Freedom? It would have to be the rodeo.
"Beauty? I don't think I know what beauty is.
Well, you know, I guess that'd have to be the rodeo too.
I mean, look how we are, the roughy family, palling around and shaking hands and wrestling around me.
It's like, you know, racking up our credit cards on entry fees and gas.
We ride together, we, you know, we, we eat together and we sleep together.
I mean, I can't even imagine what it's going to be like the last day I rodeo. I mean, I'll be alright.
I mean, I have my ranch and everything, but I actually don't even want to think the day that comes.
I mean, I guess it just be like -- I guess it be like the day my brother died.
"Toughness? Well, we was in West Jordan, Utah, and this bull shoved my face right through the metal shoots in a -- you know, busted my face all up and had to go to the hospital.
And they had to sew me up and straighten my nose out.
And I had to go and ride in the rodeo that night, so I didn't want them to put me under anesthesia, or whatever you call it. And so they sewed my face up.
And then they had to straighten out my nose, and they took these rods and shoved them up my nose and went up through my brains and felt like it was coming out the top of my head, and everybody said that it should have killed me, but it didn't, because I guess I have a high tolerance for pain.
(Laughter) But the good thing was, once they shoved those rods up there and straightened my nose out, I could breathe, and I hadn't been able to breathe since I broke my nose in the high school rodeo."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Ethic and Hedge are on the ground floor of a massive tower.
Barriers of energy separate them from their quest’s second goal: the Node of Creation.
To reach it, Ethic must use three energy streams to climb the tower.
As soon as she steps forward a timer will begin counting down from 60 seconds.
At the back of the room there’s a basin made of invisible towers that can hold energy between them.
After one minute, a torrent of energy will pour down from above, filling one unit at a time, with a force field preventing it from spilling out the front or back.
During the 60 calm seconds, Ethic and Hedge must decide exactly how many units of energy will fall.
For each of the three challenges, they must choose the amount that will fill the basin exactly.
If they do so, the energy will propel them further upwards.
But if they get the amount at all wrong, the energy lift will fail, dropping them.
Diagrams on the walls illustrate some examples.
This configuration will capture exactly 2 units of energy.
This configuration will capture 4— 3 here, and 1 here.
And this one will also capture 4, because any energy on the right would spill out.
The energy will rain down in such a way that it’ll only overflow if there’s no space that could hold it.
Hedge can make one tower of blocks visible at a time and count how tall it is, but he can’t look at the whole structure all at once.
How does Ethic program Hedge to figure out exactly how much energy each basin can hold?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
Here’s one way of thinking about what’s happening: each unoccupied cell will hold energy if and only if there is a wall eventually to its left, and a wall eventually to its right.
But it would take a long time for Hedge to check this for each individual cell.
So what if he were to consider a whole column of blocks at a time?
How many units of energy can this hold, for instance?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
Let’s analyze the problem by looking at our example.
There are 5 columns of blocks here.
The leftmost one can’t hold any energy, because there’s nothing higher than it.
The 2nd stack can have 3 units above it, as they would be trapped between these two 4 block stacks.
We get 3 units by taking the height where the energy would level off— 4, and subtracting the height of the stack— so that’s 4 minus 1.
The 3rd stack is similar— 4 to the left, 4 to the right, and it’s 3 high, so it’ll hold 4 minus 3 equals 1 unit.
The 4th stack and 5th stacks have nothing higher than them to the right, so they can’t hold any energy.
We can adapt this idea into an algorithm.
Considering one column at a time as the point of reference, Hedge can look to the left stack by stack to find the height of the tallest one, look to the right to find the height of the tallest one, and take the smaller of the two as the height the energy can fill up to.
If the result is higher than the column in question, subtract the height of the original column, and the result will be the number of units that column can hold.
If it's equal to or below the level of the column in question, the energy would spill off.
Hedge can apply that to an entire basin with a loop that starts on the left-most column and moves right, one column at a time.
For each column, he’ll run the same steps— look all the way left for the tallest, do the same to the right, take the lower height of the two, subtract the original column height, and increase the grand total if that number is positive.
His loop will repeat as many times as there are columns.
That will work, but it’ll take a long time for a large basin.
At every step Hedge repeats the action of looking left and looking right.
If there are N stacks, he’ll look at all N stacks N times.
Is there a faster way?
Here’s one time saver: before doing anything else, Hedge can start on the left, and keep a running tally of what the highest stack is.
Here that would be 2, 2 again, since the first was higher, then 4, 4, 4.
He can then find the highest right-most stacks by doing the same going right-to-left: 1, 3, 4, 4, 4.
In the end he’ll have a table like this in his memory.
Now, Hedge can take one more pass to calculate how much energy there will be above every stack with the same equation from before: take the smaller of the stored left and right values, and subtract the height of the current tower.
Instead of looking at N stacks N times, he’ll look at N stacks just 3 times— which is what’s called linear time.
There are ways to optimize the solution even further, but this is good enough for our heroes.
Ethic and Hedge work as one.
The first cascade is a breeze, and they rise up the tower.
The second is a little tougher.
The third is huge, with dozens of stacks of blocks.
The timer ticks down towards zero, but Ethic’s program is fast.
She gets the wheel in position just in time, and the energy lifts them to the Node of Creation.
Like the first, it reveals a vision: memories of years gone by.
The world machine changed everything, and Ethic, in her position as chief robotics engineer, grew troubled by what she saw.
When the Bradbarrier went up to keep the people in, she knew something was seriously wrong.
So she created three artifacts with the ability to restore people’s power, creativity, and memory, and smuggled them to three communities.
Before she could tell people how to use them, the government discovered her efforts and sent bots to arrest her and the other programmers.
The last thing Ethic used the world machine to create was a robot that would protect the ancient device from the forces of ignorance by enclosing it in a giant maze.
She named her creation Hedge.
Without warning, the energy lift flickers, then fizzles out.
[As of the morning February 27, 2020, there were at least 82,000 confirmed cases worldwide of the coronavirus and 2,810 deaths from it.
TED invited Dr. David Heymann to share the latest findings about the outbreak.] [What happens if you get infected with the coronavirus?] This looks like a very mild disease, like a common cold, in the majority of people.
There are certain people who get infected and have very serious illness; among them are health workers.
It's a very serious infection in them, as they get a higher dose than normal people, and at the same time, they have no immunity.
So in the general population, it's likely that the dose of virus that you receive when you are infected is much less than the dose that a health worker would receive, health workers having more serious infections.
So your infection would be less serious, hopefully.
So that leaves the elderly and those with comorbidities to really be the ones that we have to make sure are taken care of in hospitals.
[Who are the people who should be most concerned about this?] Well, the most concerned are people who are, first of all, in developing countries and who don't have access to good medical care and may not have access at all to a hospital, should an epidemic occur in their country.
Those people would be at great risk, especially the elderly.
Elderly in all populations are at risk, but especially those who can't get to oxygen.
In industrialized countries, it's the very elderly who have comorbidities, who have diabetes, who have other diseases, who are at risk.
The general population doesn't appear to be at great risk.
[What pre-existing medical conditions put people at higher risk?] First of all, pulmonary disease existing as a comorbidity is also important.
In general, the elderly are at greater risk, especially those over 70, because their immune systems are not as effective as they might have once been, and they are more susceptible to infections.
In addition, in some instances in China, there's been a coinfection with influenza and at the same time, there have been some bacterial superinfections on the pneumonias that are occurring.
[Where can we find up-to-date information?] The Center for Disease Control in Atlanta keeps track and has updates on a regular basis on its website.
Also, the World Health Organization in Geneva, which is coordinating many of the activities going on internationally, also has a website with daily updates.
It's our responsibility to get that information as individuals, so we understand and can make sure that we can contribute in our own way to prevention of major spread.
[You led the global response to the SARS outbreak in 2003.
How does this outbreak compare?] That's the same problem with all new infections.
This is an infection that's coming to humans who have never been exposed to this virus before.
They don't have any antibody protection, and it's not clear whether their immune system can handle this virus or not.
This is a virus that usually finds itself in bats or in other animals, and all of a sudden, it's in humans.
And humans just don't have experience with this virus.
But gradually, we are beginning to learn a lot, as we did with SARS.
And you know, there are certainly a larger number of deaths than there were with SARS.
But when you divide that by a denominator of persons who are infected, there are many, many more persons infected than there were with SARS.
The case fatality ratio, that is the ratio of deaths to the numbers of cases in SARS, was about 10 percent.
With the current coronavirus, COVID-19, it is two percent or probably less.
So it's a much less virulent virus, but it's still a virus that causes mortality, and that's what we don't want entering human populations.
[Have we responded adequately at border crossings, such as airports?] It's clearly understood that airports or any land borders cannot prevent a disease from entering.
People in the incubation period can cross that border, can enter countries and can then infect others when they become sick.
So borders are not a means of preventing infections from entering a country by checking temperatures.
Borders are important because you can provide to people arriving from areas that might be at risk of having had infection, provide them with an understanding, either a printed understanding or a verbal understanding, of what the signs and symptoms are of this infection, and what they should do if they feel that they might be infected.
[What's the timeline for a vaccine?] Vaccines are under development right now, there's a lot of research going on.
That research requires first that the vaccine be developed, then that it be studied for safety and effectiveness in animals, who are challenged with the virus after they are vaccinated, and then it must go into human studies.
The animal studies have not yet begun, but will soon begin for certain vaccines.
And it's thought that by the end of the year, or early next year, there may be some candidate vaccines that can then be studied for licensing by regulatory agencies.
So we're talking about at least a year until there's vaccine available that can be used in many populations.
[What questions about the outbreak are still unanswered?] It's clear we know how it transmits, we don't know how easily it transmits in humans, in communities or in unenclosed areas.
We know, for example, that in the enclosed area of a cruise ship, it spread very easily.
We need to better understand how it will spread once it gets into more open areas where people are exposed to people who might be sick.
[What about the global response could be improved?] A major problem in the world today is that we look at outbreaks in developing countries as something that we need to go and stop.
So when there's an outbreak of Ebola, we think "How can we go and stop this outbreak in the country?"
We don't think about "How can we help that country strengthen its capacity, so that it can detect and respond to infections?"
So we haven't invested enough in helping countries develop their core capacity in public health.
What we've done is invested in many mechanisms globally, which can provide support to other countries to go and help stop outbreaks.
But we want to see a world where every country can do its best to stop its own outbreaks.
[Will we see more emerging disease outbreaks in the future?] Today, there are over seven billion people.
And when those people come into the world, they demand more food, they demand a whole series of things and they live closer together.
In fact, we're an urban world, where people live in urban areas.
And at the same time, we're growing more animals, and those animals are contributing food to humans as well.
So what we see is that that animal-human interface is becoming closer and closer together.
And this intensive agriculture of animals and this intensive increase in human populations living together on the same planet is really a melting pot where outbreaks can occur and do occur.
We will eventually have more and more of these outbreaks.
So an emerging infection today is just a warning of what will happen in the future.
We have to make sure that that technical collaboration in the world is there to work together to make sure that we can understand these outbreaks when they occur and rapidly provide the information necessary to control them.
[Is the worst behind us?] I can't predict with accuracy.
So all I can say is that we must all be prepared for the worst-case scenario.
And at the same time, learn how we can protect ourselves and protect others should we become a part of that epidemic.
[To learn more, visit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention World Health Organization]
So I am a pediatric cancer doctor and stem-cell researcher at Stanford University where my clinical focus has been bone marrow transplantation.
Now, inspired by Jill Bolte Taylor last year, I didn't bring a human brain, but I did bring a liter of bone marrow.
And bone marrow is actually what we use to save the lives of tens of thousands of patients, most of whom have advanced malignancies like leukemia and lymphoma and some other diseases.
So, a few years ago, I'm doing my transplant fellowship at Stanford.
I'm in the operating room. We have Bob here, who is a volunteer donor.
We're sending his marrow across the country to save the life of a child with leukemia.
So actually how do we harvest this bone marrow?
Well we have a whole O.R. team, general anesthesia, nurses, and another doctor across from me.
Bob's on the table, and we take this sort of small needle, you know, not too big.
And the way we do this is we basically place this through the soft tissue, and kind of punch it into the hard bone, into the tuchus -- that's a technical term -- and aspirate about 10 mls of bone marrow out, each time, with a syringe.
And hand it off to the nurse. She squirts it into a tin.
Hands it back to me. And we do that again and again.
About 200 times usually.
And by the end of this my arm is sore, I've got a callus on my hand, let alone Bob, whose rear end looks something more like this, like Swiss cheese.
So I'm thinking, you know, this procedure hasn't changed in about 40 years.
And there is probably a better way to do this.
So I thought of a minimally invasive approach, and a new device that we call the Marrow Miner.
This is it.
And the Marrow Miner, the way it works is shown here.
Our standard see-through patient.
Instead of entering the bone dozens of times, we enter just once, into the front of the hip or the back of the hip.
And we have a flexible, powered catheter with a special wire loop tip that stays inside the crunchy part of the marrow and follows the contours of the hip, as it moves around.
So it enables you to very rapidly aspirate, or suck out, rich bone marrow very quickly through one hole.
We can do multiple passes through that same entry.
No robots required.
And, so, very quickly, Bob can just get one puncture, local anesthesia, and do this harvest as an outpatient.
So I did a few prototypes. I got a small little grant at Stanford.
And played around with this a little bit.
And our team members developed this technology.
And eventually we got two large animals, and pig studies.
And we found, to our surprise, that we not only got bone marrow out, but we got 10 times the stem cell activity in the marrow from the Marrow Miner, compared to the normal device.
This device was just FDA approved in the last year.
Here is a live patient. You can see it following the flexible curves around.
There will be two passes here, in the same patient, from the same hole.
This was done under local anesthesia, as an outpatient.
And we got, again, about three to six times more stem cells than the standard approach done on the same patient.
So why should you care? Bone marrow is a very rich source of adult stem cells.
You all know about embryonic stem cells.
They've got great potential but haven't yet entered clinical trials.
Adult stem cells are throughout our body, including the blood-forming stem cells in our bone marrow, which we've been using as a form of stem-cell therapy for over 40 years.
In the last decade there's been an explosion of use of bone marrow stem cells to treat the patient's other diseases such as heart disease, vascular disease, orthopedics, tissue engineering, even in neurology to treat Parkinson's and diabetes.
We've just come out, we're commercializing, this year, generation 2.0 of the Marrow Miner.
The hope is that this gets more stem cells out, which translates to better outcomes.
It may encourage more people to sign up to be potential live-saving bone marrow donors.
It may even enable you to bank your own marrow stem cells, when you're younger and healthier, to use in the future should you need it.
And ultimately -- and here's a picture of our bone marrow transplant survivors, who come together for a reunion each year at Stanford.
Hopefully this technology will let us have more of these survivors in the future.
Thanks.
(Applause)
I'm a neuroscientist, a professor at the University of California.
And over the past 35 years, I've studied behavior on the basis of everything from genes through neurotransmitters, dopamine, things like that, all the way through circuit analysis.
So that's what I normally do.
But then, for some reason, I got into something else, just recently.
And it all grew out of one of my colleagues asking me to analyze a bunch of brains of psychopathic killers.
And so this would be the typical talk I would give.
And the question is, "How do you end up with a psychopathic killer?"
What I mean by psychopathic killer are these people, these types of people.
And so some of the brains that I've studied are people you know about.
When I get the brains I don't know what I'm looking at.
It's blind experiments. They also gave me normal people and everything.
So I've looked at about 70 of these.
And what came up was a number of pieces of data.
So we look at these sorts of things theoretically, on the basis of genetics, and brain damage, and interaction with environment, and exactly how that machine works.
So we're interested in exactly where in the brain, and what's the most important part of the brain.
So we've been looking at this: the interaction of genes, what's called epigenetic effects, brain damage, and environment, and how these are tied together.
And how you end up with a psychopath, and a killer, depends on exactly when the damage occurs.
It's really a very precisely timed thing.
You get different kinds of psychopaths.
So we're going along with this. And here's, just to give you the pattern.
The pattern is that those people, every one of them I looked at, who was a murderer, and was a serial killer, had damage to their orbital cortex, which is right above the eyes, the orbits, and also the interior part of the temporal lobe.
So there is the pattern that every one of them had, but they all were a little different too.
They had other sorts of brain damage.
A key thing is that the major violence genes, it's called the MAO-A gene.
And there is a variant of this gene that is in the normal population.
Some of you have this. And it's sex-linked.
It's on the X chromosome. And so in this way you can only get it from your mother.
And in fact this is probably why mostly men, boys, are psychopathic killers, or are very aggressive.
Because a daughter can get one X from the father, one X from the mother, it's kind of diluted out.
But for a son, he can only get the X chromosome from his mother.
So this is how it's passed from mother to son.
And it has to do with too much brain serotonin during development, which is kind of interesting because serotonin is supposed to make you calm and relaxed.
But if you have this gene, in utero your brain is bathed in this, so your whole brain becomes insensitive to serotonin, so it doesn't work later on in life.
And I'd given this one talk in Israel, just this past year.
And it does have some consequences.
Theoretically what this means is that in order to express this gene, in a violent way, very early on, before puberty, you have to be involved in something that is really traumatic -- not a little stress, not being spanked or something, but really seeing violence, or being involved in it, in 3D.
Right? That's how the mirror neuron system works.
And so, if you have that gene, and you see a lot of violence in a certain situation, this is the recipe for disaster, absolute disaster.
And what I think might happen in these areas of the world, where we have constant violence, you end up having generations of kids that are seeing all this violence.
And if I was a young girl, somewhere in a violent area, you know, a 14 year old, and I want to find a mate, I'd find some tough guy, right, to protect me.
Well what the problem is this tends to concentrate these genes.
And now the boys and the girls get them.
So I think after several generations, and here is the idea, we really have a tinderbox.
So that was the idea.
But then my mother said to me, "I hear you've been going around talking about psychopathic killers.
And you're talking as if you come from a normal family."
I said, "What the hell are you talking about?"
She then told me about our own family tree.
Now she blamed this on my father's side, of course.
This was one of these cases, because she has no violence in her background, but my father did.
Well she said, "There is good news and bad news.
One of your cousins is Ezra Cornell, founder of Cornell university.
But the bad news is that your cousin is also Lizzie Borden.
Now I said, "Okay, so what? We have Lizzie."
She goes, "No it gets worse, read this book."
And here is this "Killed Strangely," and it's this historical book.
And the first murder of a mother by a son was my great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.
Okay, so that's the first case of matricide.
And that book is very interesting. Because it's about witch trials, and how people thought back then.
But it doesn't stop there.
There were seven more men, on my father's side, starting then, Cornells, that were all murderers.
Okay, now this gives one a little pause.
(Laughter) Because my father himself, and my three uncles, in World War II, were all conscientious objectors, all pussycats.
But every once in a while, like Lizzie Borden, like three times a century, and we're kind of due.
(Laughter) So the moral of the story is: people in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.
But more likely is this.
(Laughter) And we had to take action. Now our kids found out about it.
And they all seemed to be OK.
But our grandkids are going to be kind of concerned here.
So what we've done is I've started to do PET scans of everybody in the family.
(Laughter) We started to do PET scans, EEGs and genetic analysis to see where the bad news is.
Now the only person -- it turns out one son and one daughter, siblings, didn't get along and their patterns are exactly the same.
They have the same brain, and the same EEG.
And now they are close as can be.
But there's gonna be bad news somewhere.
And we don't know where it's going to pop up.
So that's my talk.
(Laughter)
Interestingly, Charles Darwin was born a very lightly pigmented man, in a moderately-to-darkly pigmented world.
Over the course of his life, Darwin had great privilege.
He lived in a fairly wealthy home.
He was raised by very supportive and interested parents.
And when he was in his 20s he embarked upon a remarkable voyage on the ship the Beagle.
And during the course of that voyage, he saw remarkable things: tremendous diversity of plants and animals, and humans.
And the observations that he made on that epic journey were to be eventually distilled into his wonderful book, "On the Origin of Species," published 150 years ago.
Now what is so interesting and to some, the extent, what's a bit infamous about "The Origin of Species," is that there is only one line in it about human evolution.
"Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history."
It wasn't until much longer, much later, that Darwin actually spoke and wrote about humans.
Now in his years of traveling on the Beagle, and from listening to the accounts or explorers and naturalists, he knew that skin color was one of the most important ways in which people varied.
And he was somewhat interested in the pattern of skin color.
He knew that darkly pigmented peoples were found close to the equator; lightly pigmented peoples, like himself, were found closer to the poles.
So what did he make of all this?
Well he didn't write anything about it in The Origin of Species.
But much later, in 1871, he did have something to say about it.
And it was quite curious. He said, "Of all the differences between the races of men, the color of the skin is the most conspicuous and one of the best marked."
And he went on to say, "These differences do not coincide with corresponding differences in climate."
So he had traveled all around.
He had seen people of different colors living in different places.
And yet he rejected the idea that human skin pigmentation was related to the climate.
If only Darwin lived today.
If only Darwin had NASA.
Now, one of the wonderful things that NASA does is it puts up a variety of satellites that detect all sort of interesting things about our environment.
And for many decades now there have been a series of TOMS satellites that have collected data about the radiation of the Earth's surface.
The TOMS 7 satellite data, shown here, show the annual average ultraviolet radiation at the Earth's surface.
Now the really hot pink and red areas are those parts of the world that receive the highest amounts of UV during the year.
The incrementally cooler colors -- blues, greens, yellows, and finally grays -- indicate areas of much lower ultraviolet radiation.
What's significant to the story of human skin pigmentation is just how much of the Northern Hemisphere is in these cool gray zones.
This has tremendous implications for our understanding of the evolution of human skin pigmentation.
And what Darwin could not appreciate, or didn't perhaps want to appreciate at the time, is that there was a fundamental relationship between the intensity of ultraviolet radiation and skin pigmentation.
And that skin pigmentation itself was a product of evolution.
And so when we look at a map of skin color, and predicted skin color, as we know it today, what we see is a beautiful gradient from the darkest skin pigmentations toward the equator, and the lightest ones toward the poles.
What's very, very important here is that the earliest humans evolved in high-UV environments, in equatorial Africa.
The earliest members of our lineage, the genus Homo, were darkly pigmented.
And we all share this incredible heritage of having originally been darkly pigmented, two million to one and half million years ago.
Now what happened in our history?
Let's first look at the relationship of ultraviolet radiation to the Earth's surface.
In those early days of our evolution, looking at the equator, we were bombarded by high levels of ultraviolet radiation.
The UVC, the most energetic type, was occluded by the Earth's atmosphere.
But UVB and UVA especially, came in unimpeded.
UVB turns out to be incredibly important.
It's very destructive, but it also catalyzes the production of vitamin D in the skin, vitamin D being a molecule that we very much need for our strong bones, the health of our immune system, and myriad other important functions in our bodies.
So, living at the equator, we got lots and lots of ultraviolet radiation and the melanin -- this wonderful, complex, ancient polymer compound in our skin -- served as a superb natural sunscreen.
This polymer is amazing because it's present in so many different organisms.
Melanin, in various forms, has probably been on the Earth a billion years, and has been recruited over and over again by evolution, as often happens.
Why change it if it works?
So melanin was recruited, in our lineage, and specifically in our earliest ancestors evolving in Africa, to be a natural sunscreen.
Where it protected the body against the degradations of ultraviolet radiation, the destruction, or damage to DNA, and the breakdown of a very important molecule called folate, which helps to fuel cell production, and reproduction in the body.
So, it's wonderful. We evolved this very protective, wonderful covering of melanin.
But then we moved.
And humans dispersed -- not once, but twice.
Major moves, outside of our equatorial homeland, from Africa into other parts of the Old World, and most recently, into the New World.
When humans dispersed into these latitudes, what did they face?
Conditions were significantly colder, but they were also less intense with respect to the ultraviolet regime.
So if we're somewhere in the Northern Hemisphere, look at what's happening to the ultraviolet radiation.
We're still getting a dose of UVA.
But all of the UVB, or nearly all of it, is dissipated through the thickness of the atmosphere.
In the winter, when you are skiing in the Alps, you may experience ultraviolet radiation.
But it's all UVA, and, significantly, that UVA has no ability to make vitamin D in your skin.
So people inhabiting northern hemispheric environments were bereft of the potential to make vitamin D in their skin for most of the year.
This had tremendous consequences for the evolution of human skin pigmentation.
Because what happened, in order to ensure health and well-being, these lineages of people dispersing into the Northern Hemisphere lost their pigmentation.
There was natural selection for the evolution of lightly pigmented skin.
Here we begin to see the evolution of the beautiful sepia rainbow that now characterizes all of humanity.
Lightly pigmented skin evolved not just once, not just twice, but probably three times.
Not just in modern humans, but in one of our distant unrelated ancestors, the Neanderthals.
A remarkable, remarkable testament to the power of evolution.
Humans have been on the move for a long time.
And just in the last 5,000 years, in increasing rates, over increasing distances.
Here are just some of the biggest movements of people, voluntary movements, in the last 5,000 years.
Look at some of the major latitudinal transgressions: people from high UV areas going to low UV and vice versa.
And not all these moves were voluntary.
Between 1520 and 1867, 12 million, 500 people were moved from high UV to low UV areas in the transatlantic slave trade.
Now this had all sorts of invidious social consequences.
But it also had deleterious health consequences to people.
So what? We've been on the move.
We're so clever we can overcome all of these seeming biological impediments.
Well, often we're unaware of the fact that we're living in environments in which our skin is inherently poorly adapted.
Some of us with lightly pigmented skin live in high-UV areas.
Some of us with darkly pigmented skin live in low-UV areas.
These have tremendous consequences for our health.
We have to, if we're lightly pigmented, be careful about the problems of skin cancer, and destruction of folate in our bodies, by lots of sun.
Epidemiologists and doctors have been very good about telling us about protecting our skin.
What they haven't been so good about instructing people is the problem of darkly pigmented people living in high latitude areas, or working inside all the time.
Because the problem there is just as severe, but it is more sinister, because vitamin D deficiency, from a lack of ultraviolet B radiation, is a major problem.
Vitamin D deficiency creeps up on people, and causes all sorts of health problems to their bones, to their gradual decay of their immune systems, or loss of immune function, and probably some problems with their mood and health, their mental health.
So we have, in skin pigmentation, one of these wonderful products of evolution that still has consequences for us today.
And the social consequences, as we know, are incredibly profound.
We live in a world where we have lightly and darkly pigmented people living next to one another, but often brought into proximity initially as a result of very invidious social interactions.
So how can we overcome this?
How can we begin to understand it?
Evolution helps us.
200 years after Darwin's birthday, we have the first moderately pigmented President of the United States.
(Applause) How wonderful is that?
(Applause) This man is significant for a whole host of reasons.
But we need to think about how he compares, in terms of his pigmentation, to other people on Earth.
He, as one of many urban admixed populations, is very emblematic of a mixed parentage, of a mixed pigmentation.
And he resembles, very closely, people with moderate levels of pigmentation who live in southern Africa, or Southeast Asia.
These people have a tremendous potential to tan, to develop more pigment in their skin, as a result of exposure to sun.
They also run the risk of vitamin D deficiency, if they have desk jobs, like that guy.
So lets all wish for his great health, and his awareness of his own skin pigmentation.
Now what is wonderful about the evolution of human skin pigmentation, and the phenomenon of pigmentation, is that it is the demonstration, the evidence, of evolution by natural selection, right on your body.
When people ask you, "What is the evidence for evolution?"
You don't have to think about some exotic examples, or fossils.
You just have to look at your skin.
Darwin, I think, would have appreciated this, even though he eschewed the importance of climate on the evolution of pigmentation during his own life.
I think, were he able to look at the evidence we have today, he would understand it.
He would appreciate it.
And most of all, he would teach it.
You, you can teach it.
You can touch it.
You can understand it.
Take it out of this room.
Take your skin color, and celebrate it.
Spread the word.
You have the evolution of the history of our species, part of it, written in your skin.
Understand it. Appreciate it. Celebrate it.
Go out. Isn't it beautiful? Isn't it wonderful?
You are the products of evolution.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Can I say how delighted I am to be away from the calm of Westminster and Whitehall? (Laughter) This is Kim, a nine-year-old Vietnam girl, her back ruined by napalm, and she awakened the conscience of the nation of America to begin to end the Vietnam War.
This is Birhan, who was the Ethiopian girl who launched Live Aid in the 1980s, 15 minutes away from death when she was rescued, and that picture of her being rescued is one that went round the world.
This is Tiananmen Square.
A man before a tank became a picture that became a symbol for the whole world of resistance.
This next is the Sudanese girl, a few moments from death, a vulture hovering in the background, a picture that went round the world and shocked people into action on poverty.
This is Neda, the Iranian girl who was shot while at a demonstration with her father in Iran only a few weeks ago, and she is now the focus, rightly so, of the YouTube generation.
And what do all these pictures and events have in common?
What they have in common is what we see unlocks what we cannot see.
What we see unlocks the invisible ties and bonds of sympathy that bring us together to become a human community.
What these pictures demonstrate is that we do feel the pain of others, however distantly.
What I think these pictures demonstrate is that we do believe in something bigger than ourselves.
What these pictures demonstrate is that there is a moral sense across all religions, across all faiths, across all continents -- a moral sense that not only do we share the pain of others, and believe in something bigger than ourselves but we have a duty to act when we see things that are wrong that need righted, see injuries that need to be corrected, see problems that need to be rectified.
There is a story about Olof Palme, the Swedish Prime Minister, going to see Ronald Reagan in America in the 1980s.
Before he arrived Ronald Reagan said -- and he was the Swedish Social Democratic Prime Minister -- "Isn’t this man a communist?"
The reply was, "No, Mr President, he’s an anti-communist."
And Ronald Reagan said, "I don’t care what kind of communist he is!"
(Laughter) Ronald Reagan asked Olof Palme, the Social Democratic Prime Minister of Sweden, "Well, what do you believe in? Do you want to abolish the rich?"
He said, "No, I want to abolish the poor."
Our responsibility is to let everyone have the chance to realize their potential to the full.
I believe there is a moral sense and a global ethic that commands attention from people of every religion and every faith, and people of no faith.
But I think what's new is that we now have the capacity to communicate instantaneously across frontiers right across the world.
We now have the capacity to find common ground with people who we will never meet, but who we will meet through the Internet and through all the modern means of communication; that we now have the capacity to organize and take collective action together to deal with the problem or an injustice that we want to deal with; and I believe that this makes this a unique age in human history, and it is the start of what I would call the creation of a truly global society.
Go back 200 years when the slave trade was under pressure from William Wilberforce and all the protesters.
They protested across Britain.
They won public opinion over a long period of time.
But it took 24 years for the campaign to be successful.
What could they have done with the pictures that they could have shown if they were able to use the modern means of communication to win people’s hearts and minds?
Or if you take Eglantyne Jebb, the woman who created Save the Children 90 years ago.
She was so appalled by what was happening in Austria as a result of the First World War and what was happening to children who were part of the defeated families of Austria, that in Britain she wanted to take action, but she had to go house to house, leaflet to leaflet, to get people to attend a rally in the Royal Albert Hall that eventually gave birth to Save the Children, an international organization that is now fully recognized as one of the great institutions in our land and in the world.
But what more could she have done if she’d had the modern means of communications available to her to create a sense that the injustice that people saw had to be acted upon immediately?
Now look at what’s happened in the last 10 years.
In Philippines in 2001, President Estrada -- a million people texted each other about the corruption of that regime, eventually brought it down and it was, of course, called the "coup de text." (Laughter) Then you have in Zimbabwe the first election under Robert Mugabe a year ago.
Because people were able to take mobile phone photographs of what was happening at the polling stations, it was impossible for that Premier to fix that election in the way that he wanted to do.
Or take Burma and the monks that were blogging out, a country that nobody knew anything about that was happening, until these blogs told the world that there was a repression, meaning that lives were being lost and people were being persecuted and Aung San Suu Kyi, who is one of the great prisoners of conscience of the world, had to be listened to.
Then take Iran itself, and what people are doing today: following what happened to Neda, people who are preventing the security services of Iran finding those people who are blogging out of Iran, any by everybody who is blogging, changing their address to Tehran, Iran, and making it difficult for the security services.
Take, therefore, what modern technology is capable of: the power of our moral sense allied to the power of communications and our ability to organize internationally.
That, in my view, gives us the first opportunity as a community to fundamentally change the world.
Foreign policy can never be the same again. It cannot be run by elites; it’s got to be run by listening to the public opinions of peoples who are blogging, who are communicating with each other around the world.
200 years ago the problem we had to solve was slavery.
150 years ago I suppose the main problem in a country like ours was how young people, children, had the right to education.
100 years ago in most countries in Europe, the pressure was for the right to vote.
50 years ago the pressure was for the right to social security and welfare.
In the last 50-60 years we have seen fascism, anti-Semitism, racism, apartheid, discrimination on the basis of sex and gender and sexuality; all these have come under pressure because of the campaigns that have been run by people to change the world.
I was with Nelson Mandela a year ago, when he was in London.
I was at a concert that he was attending to mark his birthday and for the creation of new resources for his foundation.
I was sitting next to Nelson Mandela -- I was very privileged to do so -- when Amy Winehouse came onto the stage. (Laughter) And Nelson Mandela was quite surprised at the appearance of the singer and I was explaining to him at the time who she was.
Amy Winehouse said, "Nelson Mandela and I have a lot in common.
My husband too has spent a long time in prison."
(Laughter) Nelson Mandela then went down to the stage and he summarized the challenge for us all.
He said in his lifetime he had climbed a great mountain, the mountain of challenging and then defeating racial oppression and defeating apartheid.
He said that there was a greater challenge ahead, the challenge of poverty, of climate change -- global challenges that needed global solutions and needed the creation of a truly global society.
We are the first generation which is in a position to do this.
Combine the power of a global ethic with the power of our ability to communicate and organize globally, with the challenges that we now face, most of which are global in their nature.
Climate change cannot be solved in one country, but has got to be solved by the world working together.
A financial crisis, just as we have seen, could not be solved by America alone or Europe alone; it needed the world to work together.
Take the problems of security and terrorism and, equally, the problem of human rights and development: they cannot be solved by Africa alone; they cannot be solved by America or Europe alone.
We cannot solve these problems unless we work together.
So the great project of our generation, it seems to me, is to build for the first time, out of a global ethic and our global ability to communicate and organize together, a truly global society, built on that ethic but with institutions that can serve that global society and make for a different future.
We have now, and are the first generation with, the power to do this.
Take climate change. Is it not absolutely scandalous that we have a situation where we know that there is a climate change problem, where we know also that that will mean we have to give more resources to the poorest countries to deal with that, when we want to create a global carbon market, but there is no global institution that people have been able to agree upon to deal with this problem?
One of the things that has got to come out of Copenhagen in the next few months is an agreement that there will be a global environmental institution that is able to deal with the problems of persuading the whole of the world to move along a climate-change agenda.
(Applause) One of the reasons why an institution is not in itself enough is that we have got to persuade people around the world to change their behavior as well, so you need that global ethic of fairness and responsibility across the generations.
Take the financial crisis.
If people in poorer countries can be hit by a crisis that starts in New York or starts in the sub-prime market of the United States of America.
If people can find that that sub-prime product has been transferred across nations many, many times until it ends up in banks in Iceland or the rest in Britain, and people's ordinary savings are affected by it, then you cannot rely on a system of national supervision.
You need in the long run for stability, for economic growth, for jobs, as well as for financial stability, global economic institutions that make sure that growth to be sustained has to be shared, and are built on the principle that the prosperity of this world is indivisible.
So another challenge for our generation is to create global institutions that reflect our ideas of fairness and responsibility, not the ideas that were the basis of the last stage of financial development over these recent years.
Then take development and take the partnership we need between our countries and the rest of the world, the poorest part of the world.
We do not have the basis of a proper partnership for the future, and yet, out of people’s desire for a global ethic and a global society that can be done.
I have just been talking to the President of Sierra Leone.
This is a country of six and a half million people, but it has only 80 doctors; it has 200 nurses; it has 120 midwives.
You cannot begin to build a healthcare system for six million people with such limited resources.
Or take the girl I met when I was in Tanzania, a girl called Miriam.
She was 11 years old; her parents had both died from AIDS, her mother and then her father.
She was an AIDS orphan being handed across different extended families to be cared for.
She herself was suffering from HIV; she was suffering from tuberculosis.
I met her in a field, she was ragged, she had no shoes.
When you looked in her eyes, any girl at the age of eleven is looking forward to the future, but there was an unreachable sadness in that girl’s eyes and if I could have translated that to the rest of the world for that moment, I believe that all the work that it had done for the global HIV/AIDS fund would be rewarded by people being prepared to make donations.
We must then build a proper relationship between the richest and the poorest countries based on our desire that they are able to fend for themselves with the investment that is necessary in their agriculture, so that Africa is not a net importer of food, but an exporter of food.
Take the problems of human rights and the problems of security in so many countries around the world.
Burma is in chains, Zimbabwe is a human tragedy, in Sudan thousands of people have died unnecessarily for wars that we could prevent.
In the Rwanda Children's Museum, there is a photograph of a 10-year-old boy and the Children's Museum is commemorating the lives that were lost in the Rwandan genocide where a million people died.
There is a photograph of a boy called David.
Beside that photograph there is the information about his life.
It said "David, age 10."
David: ambition to be a doctor.
Favorite sport: football. What did he enjoy most?
Making people laugh.
How did he die?
Tortured to death.
Last words said to his mother who was also tortured to death: "Don't worry. The United Nations are coming."
And we never did.
And that young boy believed our promises that we would help people in difficulty in Rwanda, and we never did.
So we have got to create in this world also institutions for peacekeeping and humanitarian aid, but also for reconstruction and security for some of the conflict-ridden states of the world.
So my argument today is basically this.
We have the means by which we could create a truly global society.
The institutions of this global society can be created by our endeavors.
That global ethic can infuse the fairness and responsibility that is necessary for these institutions to work, but we should not lose the chance in this generation, in this decade in particular, with President Obama in America, with other people working with us around the world, to create global institutions for the environment, and for finance, and for security and for development, that make sense of our responsibility to other peoples, our desire to bind the world together, and our need to tackle problems that everybody knows exist.
It is said that in Ancient Rome that when Cicero spoke to his audiences, people used to turn to each other and say about Cicero, "Great speech."
But it is said that in Ancient Greece when Demosthenes spoke to his audiences, people turned to each other and didn’t say "Great speech."
They said, "Let's march."
We should be marching towards a global society.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In their ramshackle hut on the edge of the woods, a husband and wife were in despair.
The woman had just given birth to their thirteenth child, and the growing family was quickly running out of food and money.
The father walked into the woods to ponder their problem.
After hours spent wandering through the trees, he encountered two shadowy silhouettes.
The first figure appeared to be the man’s God, while the second resembled the Devil.
Both figures offered to lighten the man’s burden, and act as Godfather to his most recent child.
But the man refused their offer— he wouldn’t entrust his son to those who passed judgment on human life.
He ventured deeper into the tangled thicket.
Here in the darkest part of the woods, the father made out a third figure.
Sunken eyes stared out of its gaunt face, which broke into a crooked smile.
This was Death himself, come to offer his services as Godfather.
He promised to return when the child came of age, to bring him happiness and prosperity.
The father— knowing that all people are equal in the eyes of Death— accepted his offer.
Years later, when the child had grown into an ambitious young man, his skeletal Godfather came for his promised visit.
In his gnarled hand he held a flask containing the cure for all human ailments.
Death had brought this flask for his Godson, promising to make him a successful doctor.
But the powerful potion came with very strict rules.
If his Godson encountered a sick person and Death was hovering at the top of their bed, the doctor could heal them with just a waft of the antidote’s fumes.
But if Death lingered at the foot of the bed, he’d already claimed the patient as his own— and the doctor could do nothing for them.
In time, the doctor’s potent potion and uncanny instincts became known throughout the land.
He grew rich and famous, casting off the hardships of his early life.
When the king fell ill, he summoned the famous physician to treat him.
The doctor swept into the palace, ready to show off his skills.
But when he entered the king’s chamber, he was dismayed to see Death settled at the foot of the bed.
The doctor desperately wanted the glory of saving the king— even if it meant deceiving his Godfather.
And so, he swiftly spun the bed around and reversed Death’s position, leaving the doctor free to administer the antidote.
Death was livid.
He warned his arrogant Godson that if he ever cheated Death again, he would pay for it with his life.
Death and the doctor continued their travels.
After some time, the king’s messengers came to collect the doctor yet again.
The princess was gravely ill, and the king had promised incredible riches to anyone who could cure her.
The doctor approached the princesses’ chamber with gold in his eyes.
But upon seeing the sleeping princess, his greed fell away.
He was so struck by her grace, that he failed to notice Death lurking by her feet.
He swiftly healed the princess, but before she could even utter her thanks, Death had dragged his lovesick Godson away.
In an instant, the palace dissolved around them.
The doctor found himself in an immense cave lined with countless quivering candles, each representing the duration of a life.
As punishment for his Godson’s foolish attempt to master mortality, Death whittled his candle down to its wick.
Seeing his own dwindling light, the doctor felt the fear he’d often glimpsed in his patients’ eyes.
Desperately, he begged Death to transfer his dying light onto a new candle.
His Godfather considered the request— but the doctor’s betrayal was too great.
He loosened his bony grip, and his Godson’s candle fell to the floor.
Death stood motionless, his inscrutable face fixed on the sputtering flame— until all that was left of the doctor was a wisp of smoke.
For me they normally happen, these career crises, often, actually, on a Sunday evening, just as the sun is starting to set, and the gap between my hopes for myself and the reality of my life starts to diverge so painfully that I normally end up weeping into a pillow.
I'm mentioning all this -- I'm mentioning all this because I think this is not merely a personal problem; you may think I'm wrong in this, but I think we live in an age when our lives are regularly punctuated by career crises, by moments when what we thought we knew -- about our lives, about our careers -- comes into contact with a threatening sort of reality.
It's perhaps easier now than ever before to make a good living.
It's perhaps harder than ever before to stay calm, to be free of career anxiety.
I want to look now, if I may, at some of the reasons why we might be feeling anxiety about our careers.
Why we might be victims of these career crises, as we're weeping softly into our pillows.
One of the reasons why we might be suffering is that we are surrounded by snobs.
In a way, I've got some bad news, particularly to anybody who's come to Oxford from abroad.
There's a real problem with snobbery, because sometimes people from outside the U.K.
imagine that snobbery is a distinctively U.K. phenomenon, fixated on country houses and titles.
The bad news is that's not true.
Snobbery is a global phenomenon; we are a global organization, this is a global phenomenon.
What is a snob?
A snob is anybody who takes a small part of you, and uses that to come to a complete vision of who you are.
That is snobbery.
The dominant kind of snobbery that exists nowadays is job snobbery.
You encounter it within minutes at a party, when you get asked that famous iconic question of the early 21st century, "What do you do?"
According to how you answer that question, people are either incredibly delighted to see you, or look at their watch and make their excuses.
(Laughter) Now, the opposite of a snob is your mother.
(Laughter) Not necessarily your mother, or indeed mine, but, as it were, the ideal mother, somebody who doesn't care about your achievements.
Unfortunately, most people are not our mothers.
Most people make a strict correlation between how much time, and if you like, love -- not romantic love, though that may be something -- but love in general, respect -- they are willing to accord us, that will be strictly defined by our position in the social hierarchy.
And that's a lot of the reason why we care so much about our careers and indeed start caring so much about material goods.
You know, we're often told that we live in very materialistic times, that we're all greedy people.
I don't think we are particularly materialistic.
I think we live in a society which has simply pegged certain emotional rewards to the acquisition of material goods.
It's not the material goods we want; it's the rewards we want.
It's a new way of looking at luxury goods.
The next time you see somebody driving a Ferrari, don't think, "This is somebody who's greedy."
Think, "This is somebody who is incredibly vulnerable and in need of love."
(Laughter) Feel sympathy, rather than contempt.
There are other reasons -- (Laughter) There are other reasons why it's perhaps harder now to feel calm than ever before.
One of these, and it's paradoxical, because it's linked to something that's rather nice, is the hope we all have for our careers.
Never before have expectations been so high about what human beings can achieve with their lifespan.
We're told, from many sources, that anyone can achieve anything.
We've done away with the caste system, we are now in a system where anyone can rise to any position they please.
And it's a beautiful idea.
Along with that is a kind of spirit of equality; we're all basically equal.
There are no strictly defined hierarchies.
There is one really big problem with this, and that problem is envy.
Envy, it's a real taboo to mention envy, but if there's one dominant emotion in modern society, that is envy.
And it's linked to the spirit of equality.
I think it would be very unusual for anyone here, or anyone watching, to be envious of the Queen of England.
Even though she is much richer than any of you are, and she's got a very large house, the reason why we don't envy her is because she's too weird.
(Laughter) She's simply too strange.
We can't relate to her, she speaks in a funny way, she comes from an odd place.
So we can't relate to her, and when you can't relate to somebody, you don't envy them.
The closer two people are -- in age, in background, in the process of identification -- the more there's a danger of envy, which is incidentally why none of you should ever go to a school reunion, because there is no stronger reference point than people one was at school with.
The problem of modern society is it turns the whole world into a school.
Everybody's wearing jeans, everybody's the same.
And yet, they're not.
So there's a spirit of equality combined with deep inequality, which can make for a very stressful situation.
It's probably as unlikely that you would nowadays become as rich and famous as Bill Gates, as it was unlikely in the 17th century that you would accede to the ranks of the French aristocracy.
But the point is, it doesn't feel that way.
It's made to feel, by magazines and other media outlets, that if you've got energy, a few bright ideas about technology, a garage -- you, too, could start a major thing.
(Laughter) The consequences of this problem make themselves felt in bookshops.
When you go to a large bookshop and look at the self-help sections, as I sometimes do -- if you analyze self-help books produced in the world today, there are basically two kinds.
The first kind tells you, "You can do it! You can make it! Anything's possible!"
The other kind tells you how to cope with what we politely call "low self-esteem," or impolitely call, "feeling very bad about yourself."
There's a real correlation between a society that tells people that they can do anything, and the existence of low self-esteem.
So that's another way in which something quite positive can have a nasty kickback.
There is another reason why we might be feeling more anxious -- about our careers, about our status in the world today, than ever before.
And it's, again, linked to something nice.
And that nice thing is called meritocracy.
Everybody, all politicians on Left and Right, agree that meritocracy is a great thing, and we should all be trying to make our societies really, really meritocratic.
In other words -- what is a meritocratic society?
A meritocratic society is one in which, if you've got talent and energy and skill, you will get to the top, nothing should hold you back.
It's a beautiful idea.
The problem is, if you really believe in a society where those who merit to get to the top, get to the top, you'll also, by implication, and in a far more nasty way, believe in a society where those who deserve to get to the bottom also get to the bottom and stay there.
In other words, your position in life comes to seem not accidental, but merited and deserved.
And that makes failure seem much more crushing.
You know, in the Middle Ages, in England, when you met a very poor person, that person would be described as an "unfortunate" -- literally, somebody who had not been blessed by fortune, an unfortunate.
Nowadays, particularly in the United States, if you meet someone at the bottom of society, they may unkindly be described as a "loser."
There's a real difference between an unfortunate and a loser, and that shows 400 years of evolution in society and our belief in who is responsible for our lives.
It's no longer the gods, it's us. We're in the driving seat.
That's exhilarating if you're doing well, and very crushing if you're not.
It leads, in the worst cases -- in the analysis of a sociologist like Emil Durkheim -- it leads to increased rates of suicide.
There are more suicides in developed, individualistic countries than in any other part of the world.
And some of the reason for that is that people take what happens to them extremely personally -- they own their success, but they also own their failure.
Is there any relief from some of these pressures that I've been outlining?
I think there is.
Let's take meritocracy.
This idea that everybody deserves to get where they get to, I think it's a crazy idea, completely crazy.
I will support any politician of Left and Right, with any halfway-decent meritocratic idea; I am a meritocrat in that sense.
But I think it's insane to believe that we will ever make a society that is genuinely meritocratic; it's an impossible dream.
The idea that we will make a society where literally everybody is graded, the good at the top, bad at the bottom, exactly done as it should be, is impossible.
There are simply too many random factors: accidents, accidents of birth, accidents of things dropping on people's heads, illnesses, etc.
We will never get to grade them, never get to grade people as they should.
I'm drawn to a lovely quote by St. Augustine in "The City of God," where he says, "It's a sin to judge any man by his post."
In modern English that would mean it's a sin to come to any view of who you should talk to, dependent on their business card.
It's not the post that should count.
According to St. Augustine, only God can really put everybody in their place; he's going to do that on the Day of Judgment, with angels and trumpets, and the skies will open.
Insane idea, if you're a secularist person, like me.
But something very valuable in that idea, nevertheless.
In other words, hold your horses when you're coming to judge people.
You don't necessarily know what someone's true value is.
That is an unknown part of them, and we shouldn't behave as though it is known.
There is another source of solace and comfort for all this.
When we think about failing in life, when we think about failure, one of the reasons why we fear failing is not just a loss of income, a loss of status.
What we fear is the judgment and ridicule of others.
The number one organ of ridicule, nowadays, is the newspaper.
If you open the newspaper any day of the week, it's full of people who've messed up their lives.
They've slept with the wrong person, taken the wrong substance, passed the wrong piece of legislation -- whatever it is, and then are fit for ridicule.
In other words, they have failed. And they are described as "losers."
Now, is there any alternative to this?
I think the Western tradition shows us one glorious alternative, which is tragedy.
Tragic art, as it developed in the theaters of ancient Greece, in the fifth century B.C., was essentially an art form devoted to tracing how people fail, and also according them a level of sympathy, which ordinary life would not necessarily accord them.
A few years ago, I was thinking about this, and I went to "The Sunday Sport," a tabloid newspaper I don't recommend you start reading if you're not familiar with it already.
(Laughter) And I went to talk to them about certain of the great tragedies of Western art.
I wanted to see how they would seize the bare bones of certain stories, if they came in as a news item at the news desk on a Saturday afternoon.
I mentioned Othello; they'd not heard of it but were fascinated.
(Laughter) I asked them to write a headline for the story.
They came up with "Love-Crazed Immigrant Kills Senator's Daughter."
Splashed across the headline.
I gave them the plotline of Madame Bovary.
Again, a book they were enchanted to discover.
And they wrote "Shopaholic Adulteress Swallows Arsenic After Credit Fraud."
(Laughter) And then my favorite -- they really do have a kind of genius of their own, these guys -- my favorite is Sophocles' Oedipus the King: "Sex With Mum Was Blinding."
(Laughter) (Applause) In a way, if you like, at one end of the spectrum of sympathy, you've got the tabloid newspaper.
At the other end of the spectrum, you've got tragedy and tragic art.
And I suppose I'm arguing that we should learn a little bit about what's happening in tragic art.
It would be insane to call Hamlet a loser.
He is not a loser, though he has lost.
And I think that is the message of tragedy to us, and why it's so very, very important, I think.
The other thing about modern society and why it causes this anxiety, is that we have nothing at its center that is non-human.
We are the first society to be living in a world where we don't worship anything other than ourselves.
We think very highly of ourselves, and so we should; we've put people on the Moon, done all sorts of extraordinary things.
And so we tend to worship ourselves. Our heroes are human heroes.
That's a very new situation.
Most other societies have had, right at their center, the worship of something transcendent: a god, a spirit, a natural force, the universe, whatever it is -- something else that is being worshiped.
We've slightly lost the habit of doing that, which is, I think, why we're particularly drawn to nature.
Not for the sake of our health, though it's often presented that way, but because it's an escape from the human anthill.
It's an escape from our own competition, and our own dramas.
And that's why we enjoy looking at glaciers and oceans, and contemplating the Earth from outside its perimeters, etc.
We like to feel in contact with something that is non-human, and that is so deeply important to us.
What I think I've been talking about really is success and failure.
And one of the interesting things about success is that we think we know what it means.
If I said that there's somebody behind the screen who's very successful, certain ideas would immediately come to mind.
You'd think that person might have made a lot of money, achieved renown in some field.
My own theory of success -- I'm somebody who's very interested in success, I really want to be successful, always thinking, how can I be more successful?
But as I get older, I'm also very nuanced about what that word "success" might mean.
Here's an insight that I've had about success: You can't be successful at everything.
We hear a lot of talk about work-life balance.
Nonsense.
So any vision of success has to admit what it's losing out on, where the element of loss is.
And I think any wise life will accept, as I say, that there is going to be an element where we're not succeeding.
And the thing about a successful life is that a lot of the time, our ideas of what it would mean to live successfully are not our own.
They're sucked in from other people; chiefly, if you're a man, your father, and if you're a woman, your mother.
Psychoanalysis has been drumming home this message for about 80 years.
No one's quite listening hard enough, but I very much believe it's true.
And we also suck in messages from everything from the television, to advertising, to marketing, etc.
These are hugely powerful forces that define what we want and how we view ourselves.
When we're told that banking is a very respectable profession, a lot of us want to go into banking.
When banking is no longer so respectable, we lose interest in banking.
We are highly open to suggestion.
So what I want to argue for is not that we should give up on our ideas of success, but we should make sure that they are our own.
We should focus in on our ideas, and make sure that we own them; that we are truly the authors of our own ambitions.
Because it's bad enough not getting what you want, but it's even worse to have an idea of what it is you want, and find out, at the end of the journey, that it isn't, in fact, what you wanted all along.
So, I'm going to end it there.
But what I really want to stress is: by all means, success, yes.
But let's accept the strangeness of some of our ideas.
Let's probe away at our notions of success.
Let's make sure our ideas of success are truly our own.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: That was fascinating.
But how do you reconcile this idea of it being bad to think of someone as a "loser," with the idea that a lot of people like, of seizing control of your life, and that a society that encourages that, perhaps has to have some winners and losers?
Alain De Botton: Yes, I think it's merely the randomness of the winning and losing process that I want to stress, because the emphasis nowadays is so much on the justice of everything, and politicians always talk about justice.
Now I'm a firm believer in justice, I just think that it's impossible.
So we should do everything we can to pursue it, but we should always remember that whoever is facing us, whatever has happened in their lives, there will be a strong element of the haphazard.
That's what I'm trying to leave room for; otherwise, it can get quite claustrophobic.
CA: I mean, do you believe that you can combine your kind of kinder, gentler philosophy of work with a successful economy?
Or do you think that you can't, but it doesn't matter that much that we're putting too much emphasis on that?
AB: The nightmare thought is that frightening people is the best way to get work out of them, and that somehow the crueler the environment, the more people will rise to the challenge.
You want to think, who would you like as your ideal dad?
And your ideal dad is somebody who is tough but gentle.
And it's a very hard line to make.
We need fathers, as it were, the exemplary father figures in society, avoiding the two extremes, which is the authoritarian disciplinarian on the one hand, and on the other, the lax, no-rules option.
CA: Alain De Botton.
AB: Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Hello! My name is Golan Levin.
I'm an artist and an engineer, which is, increasingly, a more common kind of hybrid.
But I still fall into this weird crack where people don't seem to understand me.
And I was looking around and I found this wonderful picture.
It's a letter from "Artforum" in 1967 saying "We can't imagine ever doing a special issue on electronics or computers in art." And they still haven't.
And lest you think that you all, as the digerati, are more enlightened, I went to the Apple iPhone app store the other day.
Where's art? I got productivity. I got sports.
And somehow the idea that one would want to make art for the iPhone, which my friends and I are doing now, is still not reflected in our understanding of what computers are for.
So, from both directions, there is kind of, I think, a lack of understanding about what it could mean to be an artist who uses the materials of his own day, or her own day, which I think artists are obliged to do, is to really explore the expressive potential of the new tools that we have.
In my own case, I'm an artist, and I'm really interested in expanding the vocabulary of human action, and basically empowering people through interactivity.
I want people to discover themselves as actors, as creative actors, by having interactive experiences.
A lot of my work is about trying to get away from this.
This a photograph of the desktop of a student of mine.
And when I say desktop, I don't just mean the actual desk where his mouse has worn away the surface of the desk.
If you look carefully, you can even see a hint of the Apple menu, up here in the upper left, where the virtual world has literally punched through to the physical.
So this is, as Joy Mountford once said, "The mouse is probably the narrowest straw you could try to suck all of human expression through."
(Laughter) And the thing I'm really trying to do is enabling people to have more rich kinds of interactive experiences.
How can we get away from the mouse and use our full bodies as a way of exploring aesthetic experiences, not necessarily utilitarian ones.
So I write software. And that's how I do it.
And a lot of my experiences resemble mirrors in some way.
Because this is, in some sense, the first way, that people discover their own potential as actors, and discover their own agency.
By saying "Who is that person in the mirror? Oh it's actually me."
And so, to give an example, this is a project from last year, which is called the Interstitial Fragment Processor.
And it allows people to explore the negative shapes that they create when they're just going about their everyday business.
So as people make shapes with their hands or their heads and so forth, or with each other, these shapes literally produce sounds and drop out of thin air -- basically taking what's often this, kind of, unseen space, or this undetected space, and making it something real, that people then can appreciate and become creative with.
So again, people discover their creative agency in this way.
And their own personalities come out in totally unique ways.
So in addition to using full-body input, something that I've explored now, for a while, has been the use of the voice, which is an immensely expressive system for us, vocalizing.
Song is one of our oldest ways of making ourselves heard and understood.
And I came across this fantastic research by Wolfgang Köhler, the so-called father of gestalt psychology, from 1927, who submitted to an audience like yourselves the following two shapes.
And he said one of them is called Maluma.
And one of them is called Taketa. Which is which?
Anyone want to hazard a guess?
Maluma is on top. Yeah. So.
As he says here, most people answer without any hesitation.
So what we're really seeing here is a phenomenon called phonaesthesia, which is a kind of synesthesia that all of you have.
And so, whereas Dr. Oliver Sacks has talked about how perhaps one person in a million actually has true synesthesia, where they hear colors or taste shapes, and things like this, phonaesthesia is something we can all experience to some extent.
It's about mappings between different perceptual domains, like hardness, sharpness, brightness and darkness, and the phonemes that we're able to speak with.
So 70 years on, there's been some research where cognitive psychologists have actually sussed out the extent to which, you know, L, M and B are more associated with shapes that look like this, and P, T and K are perhaps more associated with shapes like this.
And here we suddenly begin to have a mapping between curvature that we can exploit numerically, a relative mapping between curvature and shape.
So it occurred to me, what happens if we could run these backwards?
And thus was born the project called Remark, which is a collaboration with Zachary Lieberman and the Ars Electronica Futurelab.
And this is an interactive installation which presents the fiction that speech casts visible shadows.
So the idea is you step into a kind of a magic light.
And as you do, you see the shadows of your own speech.
And they sort of fly away, out of your head.
If a computer speech recognition system is able to recognize what you're saying, then it spells it out.
And if it isn't then it produces a shape which is very phonaesthetically tightly coupled to the sounds you made.
So let's bring up a video of that.
(Applause) Thanks. So. And this project here, I was working with the great abstract vocalist, Jaap Blonk.
And he is a world expert in performing "The Ursonate," which is a half-an-hour nonsense poem by Kurt Schwitters, written in the 1920s, which is half an hour of very highly patterned nonsense.
And it's almost impossible to perform.
But Jaap is one of the world experts in performing it.
And in this project we've developed a form of intelligent real-time subtitles.
So these are our live subtitles, that are being produced by a computer that knows the text of "The Ursonate" -- fortunately Jaap does too, very well -- and it is delivering that text at the same time as Jaap is.
So all the text you're going to see is real-time generated by the computer, visualizing what he's doing with his voice.
Here you can see the set-up where there is a screen with the subtitles behind him.
Okay. So ...
(Applause) The full videos are online if you are interested.
I got a split reaction to that during the live performance, because there is some people who understand live subtitles are a kind of an oxymoron, because usually there is someone making them afterwards.
And then a bunch of people who were like, "What's the big deal?
I see subtitles all the time on television."
You know? They don't imagine the person in the booth, typing it all.
So in addition to the full body, and in addition to the voice, another thing that I've been really interested in, most recently, is the use of the eyes, or the gaze, in terms of how people relate to each other.
It's a really profound amount of nonverbal information that's communicated with the eyes.
And it's one of the most interesting technical challenges that's very currently active in the computer sciences: being able to have a camera that can understand, from a fairly big distance away, how these little tiny balls are actually pointing in one way or another to reveal what you're interested in, and where your attention is directed.
So there is a lot of emotional communication that happens there.
And so I've been beginning, with a variety of different projects, to understand how people can relate to machines with their eyes.
And basically to ask the questions: What if art was aware that we were looking at it?
How could it respond, in a way, to acknowledge or subvert the fact that we're looking at it?
And what could it do if it could look back at us?
And so those are the questions that are happening in the next projects.
In the first one which I'm going to show you, called Eyecode, it's a piece of interactive software in which, if we read this little circle, "the trace left by the looking of the previous observer looks at the trace left by the looking of previous observer."
The idea is that it's an image wholly constructed from its own history of being viewed by different people in an installation.
So let me just switch over so we can do the live demo.
So let's run this and see if it works.
Okay. Ah, there is lots of nice bright video.
There is just a little test screen that shows that it's working.
And what I'm just going to do is -- I'm going to hide that.
And you can see here that what it's doing is it's recording my eyes every time I blink.
Hello? And I can ... hello ... okay.
And no matter where I am, what's really going on here is that it's an eye-tracking system that tries to locate my eyes.
And if I get really far away I'm blurry.
You know, you're going to have these kind of blurry spots like this that maybe only resemble eyes in a very very abstract way.
But if I come up really close and stare directly at the camera on this laptop then you'll see these nice crisp eyes.
You can think of it as a way of, sort of, typing, with your eyes.
And what you're typing are recordings of your eyes as you're looking at other peoples' eyes.
So each person is looking at the looking of everyone else before them.
And this exists in larger installations where there are thousands and thousands of eyes that people could be staring at, as you see who's looking at the people looking at the people looking before them.
So I'll just add a couple more. Blink. Blink.
And you can see, just once again, how it's sort of finding my eyes and doing its best to estimate when it's blinking.
Alright. Let's leave that.
So that's this kind of recursive observation system.
(Applause) Thank you.
The last couple pieces I'm going to show are basically in the new realm of robotics -- for me, new for me.
It's called Opto-Isolator.
And I'm going to show a video of the older version of it, which is just a minute long. Okay.
In this case, the Opto-Isolator is blinking in response to one's own blinks.
So it blinks one second after you do.
This is a device which is intended to reduce the phenomenon of gaze down to the simplest possible materials.
Just one eye, looking at you, and eliminating everything else about a face, but just to consider gaze in an isolated way as a kind of, as an element.
And at the same time, it attempts to engage in what you might call familiar psycho-social gaze behaviors.
Like looking away if you look at it too long because it gets shy, or things like that.
Okay. So the last project I'm going to show is this new one called Snout.
(Laughter) It's an eight-foot snout, with a googly eye.
(Laughter) And inside it's got an 800-pound robot arm that I borrowed, (Laughter) from a friend.
(Laughter) It helps to have good friends.
I'm at Carnegie Mellon; we've got a great Robotics Institute there.
I'd like to show you thing called Snout, which is -- The idea behind this project is to make a robot that appears as if it's continually surprised to see you.
(Laughter) The idea is that basically -- if it's constantly like "Huh? ... Huh?"
That's why its other name is Doubletaker, Taker of Doubles.
It's always kind of doing a double take: "What?"
And the idea is basically, can it look at you and make you feel as if like, "What? Is it my shoes?"
"Got something on my hair?" Here we go. Alright.
Checking him out ...
For you nerds, here's a little behind-the-scenes.
It's got a computer vision system, and it tries to look at the people who are moving around the most.
Those are its targets.
Up there is the skeleton, which is actually what it's trying to do.
It's really about trying to create a novel body language for a new creature.
Hollywood does this all the time, of course.
But also have the body language communicate something to the person who is looking at it.
This language is communicating that it is surprised to see you, and it's interested in looking at you.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you very much. That's all I've got for today.
And I'm really happy to be here. Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Well, this is 2009.
And it's the Bicentenary of Charles Darwin.
And all over the world, eminent evolutionists are anxious to celebrate this.
And what they're planning to do is to enlighten us on almost every aspect of Darwin and his life, and how he changed our thinking.
I say almost every aspect, because there is one aspect of this story which they have thrown no light on.
And they seem anxious to skirt around it and step over it and to talk about something else.
So I'm going to talk about it.
It's the question of, why are we so different from the chimpanzees?
We get the geneticists keeping on telling us how extremely closely we are related -- hardly any genes of difference, very, very closely related.
And yet, when you look at the phenotypes, there's a chimp, there's a man; they're astoundingly different, no resemblance at all.
I'm not talking about airy-fairy stuff about culture or psychology, or behavior.
I'm talking about ground-base, nitty-gritty, measurable physical differences.
They, that one, is hairy and walking on four legs.
That one is a naked biped. Why?
I mean -- (Laughter) if I'm a good Darwinist, I've got to believe there's a reason for that.
If we changed so much, something must have happened.
What happened?
Now 50 years ago, that was a laughably simple question.
Everybody knew the answer.
They knew what happened.
The ancestor of the apes stayed in the trees; our ancestors went out onto the plain.
That explained everything.
We had to get up on our legs to peer over the tall grass, or to chase after animals, or to free our hands for weapons.
And we got so overheated in the chase that we had to take off that fur coat and throw it away.
Everybody knew that, for generations.
But then, in the '90s, something began to unravel.
The paleontologists themselves looked a bit more closely at the accompanying microfauna that lived in the same time and place as the hominids.
And they weren't savanna species.
And they looked at the herbivores. And they weren't savanna herbivores.
And then they were so clever, they found a way to analyze fossilized pollen.
Shock, horror.
The fossilized pollen was not of savanna vegetation.
Some of it even came from lianas, those things that dangle in the middle of the jungle.
So we're left with a situation where we know that our earliest ancestors were moving around on four legs in the trees, before the savanna ecosystem even came into existence.
This is not something I've made up.
It's not a minority theory.
Everybody agrees with it.
Professor Tobias came over from South Africa and spoke to University College London.
He said, "Everything I've been telling you for the last 20 years, forget about it. It was wrong.
We've got to go back to square one and start again."
It made him very unpopular. They didn't want to go back to square one.
I mean, it's a terrible thing to happen.
You've got this beautiful paradigm.
You've believed it through generations.
Nobody has questioned it.
You've been constructing fanciful things on top of it, relying on it to be as solid as a rock.
And now it's whipped away from under you.
What do you do? What does a scientist do in that case?
Well, we know the answer because Thomas S. Kuhn wrote a seminal treatise about this back in 1962.
He said what scientists do when a paradigm fails is, guess what -- they carry on as if nothing had happened.
(Laughter) If they haven't got a paradigm they can't ask the question.
So they say, "Yes it's wrong, but supposing it was right ..."
(Laughter) And the only other option open to them is to stop asking the questions.
So that is what they have done now.
That's why you don't hear them talking about it. It's yesterday's question.
Some of them have even elevated it into a principle.
It's what we ought to be doing.
Aaron Filler from Harvard said, "Isn't it time we stopped talking about selective pressures?
I mean, why don't we talk about, well, there's chromosomes, and there's genes.
And we just record what we see."
Charles Darwin must be spinning in his grave!
He knew all about that kind of science.
And he called it hypothesis-free science.
And he despised it from the bottom of his heart.
And if you're going to say, "I'm going to stop talking about selective pressures," you can take "The Origin of Species" and throw it out of the window, for it's about nothing else but selective pressures.
And the irony of it is, that this is one occasion of a paradigm collapse where we didn't have to wait for a new paradigm to come up.
There was one waiting in the wings.
It had been waiting there since 1960 when Alister Hardy, a marine biologist, said, "I think what happened, perhaps our ancestors had a more aquatic existence for some of the time."
He kept it to himself for 30 years.
But then the press got hold of it and all hell broke loose.
All his colleagues said, "This is outrageous.
You've exposed us to public ridicule!
You must never do that again."
And at that time, it became set in stone: the aquatic theory should be dumped with the UFOs and the yetis, as part of the lunatic fringe of science.
Well I don't think that.
I think that Hardy had a lot going for him.
I'd like to talk about just a handful of what have been called the hallmarks of mankind, the things that made us different from everybody else, and all our relatives.
Let's look at our naked skin.
It's obvious that most of the things we think about that have lost their body hair, mammals without body hair, are aquatic ones, like the dugong, the walrus, the dolphin, the hippopotamus, the manatee.
And a couple of wallowers-in-mud like the babirusa.
And you're tempted to think, well perhaps, could that be why we are naked?
I suggested it and people said, "No no no.
I mean, look at the elephant.
You've forgotten all about the elephant haven't you?"
So back in 1982 I said, "Well perhaps the elephant had an aquatic ancestor."
Peals of merry laughter!
"That crazy woman. She's off again. She'll say anything won't she?"
But by now, everybody agrees that the elephant had an aquatic ancestor.
This has come 'round to be that all those naked pachyderms have aquatic ancestors.
The last exception was supposed to be the rhinoceros.
Last year in Florida they found extinct ancestor of a rhinoceros and said, "Seems to have spent most of its time in the water."
So this is a close connection between nakedness and water.
As an absolute connection, it only works one way.
You can't say all aquatic animals are naked, because look at the sea otter.
But you can say that every animal that has become naked has been conditioned by water, in its own lifetime, or the lifetime of its ancestors. I think this is significant.
The only exception is the naked Somalian mole-rat, which never puts its nose above the surface of the ground.
And take bipedality.
Here you can't find anybody to compare it with, because we're the only animal that walks upright on two legs.
But you can say this: all the apes and all the monkeys are capable of walking on two legs, if they want to, for a short time.
There is only one circumstance in which they always, all of them, walk on two legs, and that is when they are wading through water.
Do you think that's significant?
David Attenborough thinks it's significant, as the possible beginning of our bipedalism.
Look at the fat layer.
We have got, under our skin, a layer of fat, all over: nothing in the least like that in any other primate.
Why should it be there?
Well they do know, that if you look at other aquatic mammals, the fat that in most land mammals is deposited inside the body wall, around the kidneys and the intestines and so on, has started to migrate to the outside, and spread out in a layer inside the skin.
In the whale it's complete: no fat inside at all, all in blubber outside.
We cannot avoid the suspicion that in our case it's started to happen.
We have got skin lined with this layer.
It's the only possible explanation of why humans, if they're very unlucky, can become grossly obese, in a way that would be totally impossible for any other primate, physically impossible.
Something very odd, matter-of-factly, never explained.
The question of why we can speak.
We can speak.
And the gorilla can't speak. Why?
Nothing to do with his teeth or his tongue or his lungs or anything like that -- purely has to do with its conscious control of its breath.
You can't even train a gorilla to say "Ah" on request.
The only creatures that have got conscious control of their breath are the diving animals and the diving birds.
It was an absolute precondition for our being able to speak.
And then again, there is the fact that we are streamlined.
Trying to imagine a diver diving into water -- hardly makes a splash.
Try to imagine a gorilla performing the same maneuver, and you can see that, compared with gorilla, we are halfway to being shaped like a fish.
I am trying to suggest that, for 40-odd years, this aquatic idea has been miscategorized as lunatic fringe, and it is not lunatic fringe.
And the ironic thing about it is that they are not staving off the aquatic theory to protect a theory of their own, which they've all agreed on, and they love.
There is nothing there.
They are staving off the aquatic theory to protect a vacuum.
(Laughter) (Applause) How do they react when I say these things?
One very common reaction I've heard about 20 times is, "But it was investigated.
They conducted a serious investigation of this at the beginning, when Hardy put forward his article."
I don't believe it.
For 35 years I've been looking for any evidence of any incident of that kind, and I've concluded that that's one of the urban myths.
It's never been done.
I ask people sometimes, and they say, "I like the aquatic theory!
Everybody likes the aquatic theory.
Of course they don't believe it, but they like it."
Well I say, "Why do you think it's rubbish?"
They say "Well ...
everybody I talk to says it's rubbish.
And they can't all be wrong, can they?"
The answer to that, loud and clear, is, "Yes! They can all be wrong."
History is strewn with the cases when they've all got it wrong.
(Applause) And if you've got a scientific problem like that, you can't solve it by holding a head count, and saying, "More of us say yes than say no."
(Laughter) Apart from that, some of the heads count more than others.
Some of them have come over.
There was Professor Tobias. He's come over.
Daniel Dennett, he's come over.
Sir David Attenborough, he's come over.
Anybody else out there? Come on in.
The water is lovely.
(Applause) And now we've got to look to the future.
Ultimately one of three things is going to happen.
Either they will go on for the next 40 years, 50 years, 60 years.
"Yeah well we don't talk about that. Let's talk about something interesting."
That would be very sad.
The second thing that could happen is that some young genius will arrive, and say, "I've found it.
It was not the savanna, it was not the water, it was this!"
No sign of that happening either.
I don't think there is a third option.
So the third thing that might happen is a very beautiful thing.
If you look back at the early years of the last century, there was a stand-off, a lot of bickering and bad feeling between the believers in Mendel, and the believers in Darwin.
It ended with a new synthesis: Darwin's ideas and Mendel's ideas blending together.
And I think the same thing will happen here.
You'll get a new synthesis.
Hardy's ideas and Darwin's ideas will be blended together.
And we can move forward from there, and really get somewhere.
That would be a beautiful thing.
It would be very nice for me if it happened soon.
(Laughter) Because I'm older now than George Burns was when he said, "At my age, I don't even buy green bananas."
(Laughter) So if it's going to come and it's going to happen, what's holding it up?
I can tell you that in three words.
Academia says no.
They decided in 1960, "That belongs with the UFOs and the yetis."
And it's not easy to change their minds.
The professional journals won't touch it with a barge pole.
The textbooks don't mention it.
The syllabus doesn't mention even the fact that we're naked, let alone look for a reason to it.
"Horizon," which takes its cue from the academics, won't touch it with a barge pole.
So we never hear the case put for it, except in jocular references to people on the lunatic fringe.
I don't know quite where this diktat comes from.
Somebody up there is issuing the commandment, "Thou shalt not believe in the aquatic theory.
And if you hope to make progress in this profession, and you do believe it, you'd better keep it to yourself, because it will get in your way."
So I get the impression that some parts of the scientific establishment are morphing into a kind of priesthood.
But you know, that makes me feel good, because Richard Dawkins has told us how to treat a priesthood.
(Laughter) He says, "Firstly, you've got to refuse to give it all the excessive awe and reverence it's been trained to receive."
Right. I'll go ahead with that.
And secondly, he says, "You must never be afraid to rock the boat."
I'll go along with that too.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Take a look at this picture.
It poses a very fascinating puzzle for us.
These African students are doing their homework under streetlights at the airport in the capital city because they don't have any electricity at home.
Now, I haven't met these particular students, but I've met students like them.
Let's just pick one -- for example, the one in the green shirt.
Let's give him a name, too: Nelson.
I'll bet Nelson has a cellphone.
So here is the puzzle.
Why is it that Nelson has access to a cutting-edge technology, like the cellphone, but doesn't have access to a 100-year-old technology for generating electric light in the home?
Now, in a word, the answer is "rules."
Bad rules can prevent the kind of win-win solution that's available when people can bring new technologies in and make them available to someone like Nelson.
What kinds of rules?
The electric company in this nation operates under a rule, which says that it has to sell electricity at a very low, subsidized price -- in fact, a price that is so low it loses money on every unit that it sells.
So it has neither the resources, nor the incentives, to hook up many other users.
The president wanted to change this rule.
He's seen that it's possible to have a different set of rules, rules where businesses earn a small profit, so they have an incentive to sign up more customers.
That's the kind of rules that the cellphone company that Nelson purchases his telephony from operates under.
The president has seen how those rules worked well.
So he tried to change the rules for pricing on electricity, but ran into a firestorm of protest from businesses and consumers who wanted to preserve the existing subsidized rates.
So he was stuck with rules that prevented him from letting the win-win solution help his country.
And Nelson is stuck studying under the streetlights.
The real challenge then, is to try to figure out how we can change rules.
Are there some rules we can develop for changing rules?
I want to argue that there is a general abstract insight that we can make practical, which is that, if we can give more choices to people, and more choices to leaders -- who, in many countries, are also people.
(Laughter) But, it's useful to present the opposition between these two.
Because the kind of choice you might want to give to a leader, a choice like giving the president the choice to raise prices on electricity, takes away a choice that people in the economy want.
They want the choice to be able to continue consuming subsidized electric power.
So if you give just to one side or the other, you'll have tension or friction.
But if we can find ways to give more choices to both, that will give us a set of rules for changing rules that get us out of traps.
Now, Nelson also has access to the Internet.
And he says that if you want to see the damaging effects of rules, the ways that rules can keep people in the dark, look at the pictures from NASA of the earth at night.
In particular check out Asia.
If you zoom in here, you can see North Korea, in outline here, which is like a black hole compared to its neighbors.
Now, you won't be surprised to learn that the rules in North Korea keep people there in the dark.
But it is important to recognize that North Korea and South Korea started out with identical sets of rules in both the sense of laws and regulations, but also in the deeper senses of understandings, norms, culture, values and beliefs.
When they separated, they made choices that led to very divergent paths for their sets of rules.
So we can change -- we as humans can change the rules that we use to interact with each other, for better, or for worse.
Now let's look at another region, the Caribbean.
Zoom in on Haiti, in outline here.
Haiti is also dark, compared to its neighbor here, the Dominican Republic, which has about the same number of residents.
Both of these countries are dark compared to Puerto Rico, which has half as many residents as either Haiti or the Dominican Republic.
What Haiti warns us is that rules can be bad because governments are weak.
It's not just that the rules are bad because the government is too strong and oppressive, as in North Korea.
So that if we want to create environments with good rules, we can't just tear down.
We've got to find ways to build up, as well.
Now, China dramatically demonstrates both the potential and the challenges of working with rules.
Back in the beginning of the data presented in this chart, China was the world's high-technology leader.
Chinese had pioneered technologies like steel, printing, gunpowder.
But the Chinese never adopted, at least in that period, effective rules for encouraging the spread of those ideas -- a profit motive that could have encouraged the spread.
And they soon adopted rules which slowed down innovation and cut China off from the rest of the world.
So as other countries in the world innovated, in the sense both of developing newer technologies, but also developing newer rules, the Chinese were cut off from those advances.
Income there stayed stagnant, as it zoomed ahead in the rest of the world.
This next chart looks at more recent data.
It plots income, average income in China as a percentage of average income in the United States.
In the '50s and '60s you can see that it was hovering at about three percent.
But then in the late '70s something changed.
Growth took off in China. The Chinese started catching up very quickly with the United States.
If you go back to the map at night, you can get a clue to the process that lead to the dramatic change in rules in China.
The brightest spot in China, which you can see on the edge of the outline here, is Hong Kong.
Hong Kong was a small bit of China that, for most of the 20th century, operated under a very different set of rules than the rest of mainland China -- rules that were copied from working market economies of the time, and administered by the British.
In the 1950s, Hong Kong was a place where millions of people could go, from the mainland, to start in jobs like sewing shirts, making toys.
But, to get on a process of increasing income, increasing skills led to very rapid growth there.
Hong Kong was also the model which leaders like Deng Xiaoping could copy, when they decided to move all of the mainland towards the market model.
But Deng Xiaoping instinctively understood the importance of offering choices to his people.
So instead of forcing everyone in China to shift immediately to the market model, they proceeded by creating some special zones that could do, in a sense, what Britain did: make the opportunity to go work with the market rules available to the people who wanted to opt in there.
So they created four special economic zones around Hong Kong: zones where Chinese could come and work, and cities grew up very rapidly there; also zones where foreign firms could come in and make things.
One of the zones next to Hong Kong has a city called Shenzhen.
In that city there is a Taiwanese firm that made the iPhone that many of you have, and they made it with labor from Chinese who moved there to Shenzhen.
So after the four special zones, there were 14 coastal cites that were open in the same sense, and eventually demonstrated successes in these places that people could opt in to, that they flocked to because of the advantages they offered.
Demonstrated successes there led to a consensus for a move toward the market model for the entire economy.
Now the Chinese example shows us several points.
One is: preserve choices for people.
Two: operate on the right scale.
If you try to change the rules in a village, you could do that, but a village would be too small to get the kinds of benefits you can get if you have millions of people all working under good rules.
On the other hand, the nation is too big.
If you try to change the rules in the nation, you can't give some people a chance to hold back, see how things turn out, and let others zoom ahead and try the new rules.
But cities give you this opportunity to create new places, with new rules that people can opt in to.
And they're large enough to get all of the benefits that we can have when millions of us work together under good rules.
So the proposal is that we conceive of something called a charter city.
We start with a charter that specifies all the rules required to attract the people who we'll need to build the city.
We'll need to attract the investors who will build out the infrastructure -- the power system, the roads, the port, the airport, the buildings.
You'll need to attract firms, who will come hire the people who move there first.
And you'll need to attract families, the residents who will come and live there permanently, raise their children, get an education for their children, and get their first job.
With that charter, people will move there.
The city can be built.
And we can scale this model.
We can go do it over and over again.
To make it work, we need good rules. We've already discussed that.
Those are captured in the charter.
We also need the choices for people.
That's really built into the model if we allow for the possibility of building cities on uninhabited land.
You start from uninhabited territory.
People can come live under the new charter, but no one is forced to live under it.
The final thing we need are choices for leaders.
And, to achieve the kind of choices we want for leaders we need to allow for the potential for partnerships between nations: cases where nations work together, in effect, de facto, the way China and Britain worked together to build, first a little enclave of the market model, and then scale it throughout China.
In a sense, Britain, inadvertently, through its actions in Hong Kong, did more to reduce world poverty than all the aid programs that we've undertaken in the last century.
So if we allow for these kind of partnerships to replicate this again, we can get those kinds of benefits scaled throughout the world.
In some cases this will involve a delegation of responsibility, a delegation of control from one country to another to take over certain kinds of administrative responsibilities.
Now, when I say that, some of you are starting to think, "Well, is this just bringing back colonialism?"
It's not. But it's important to recognize that the kind of emotions that come up when we start to think about these things, can get in the way, can make us pull back, can shut down our ability, and our interest in trying to explore new ideas.
Why is this not like colonialism?
The thing that was bad about colonialism, and the thing which is residually bad in some of our aid programs, is that it involved elements of coercion and condescension.
This model is all about choices, both for leaders and for the people who will live in these new places.
And, choice is the antidote to coercion and condescension.
So let's talk about how this could play out in practice.
Let's take a particular leader, Raul Castro, who is the leader of Cuba.
It must have occurred to Castro that he has the chance to do for Cuba what Deng Xiaoping did for China, but he doesn't have a Hong Kong there on the island in Cuba.
He does, though, have a little bit of light down in the south that has a very special status.
There is a zone there, around Guantanamo Bay, where a treaty gives the United States administrative responsibility for a piece of land that's about twice the size of Manhattan.
Castro goes to the prime minister of Canada and says, "Look, the Yankees have a terrible PR problem.
They want to get out.
Why don't you, Canada, take over?
Build -- run a special administrative zone.
Allow a new city to be built up there.
Allow many people to come in.
Let us have a Hong Kong nearby.
Some of my citizens will move into that city as well.
Others will hold back. But this will be the gateway that will connect the modern economy and the modern world to my country."
Now, where else might this model be tried?
Well, Africa. I've talked with leaders in Africa.
Many of them totally get the notion of a special zone that people can opt into as a rule.
It's a rule for changing rules.
It's a way to create new rules, and let people opt-in without coercion, and the opposition that coercion can force.
They also totally get the idea that in some instances they can make more credible promises to long-term investors -- the kind of investors who will come build the port, build the roads, in a new city -- they can make more credible promises if they do it along with a partner nation.
Perhaps even in some arrangement that's a little bit like an escrow account, where you put land in the escrow account and the partner nation takes responsibility for it.
There is also lots of land in Africa where new cities could be built.
This is a picture I took when I was flying along the coast.
There are immense stretches of land like this -- land where hundreds of millions of people could live.
Now, if we generalize this and think about not just one or two charter cites, but dozens -- cities that will help create places for the many hundreds of millions, perhaps billions of people who will move to cities in the coming century -- is there enough land for them?
Well, throughout the world, if we look at the lights at night, the one thing that's misleading is that, visually, it looks like most of the world is already built out.
So let me show you why that's wrong.
Take this representation of all of the land.
Turn it into a square that stands for all the arable land on Earth.
And let these dots represent the land that's already taken up by the cities that three billion people now live in.
If you move the dots down to the bottom of the rectangle you can see that the cities for the existing three billion urban residents take up only three percent of the arable land on earth.
So if we wanted to build cities for another billion people, they would be dots like this.
We'd go from three percent of the arable land, to four percent.
We'd dramatically reduce the human footprint on Earth by building more cities that people can move to.
And if these are cities governed by good rules, they can be cities where people are safe from crime, safe from disease and bad sanitation, where people have a chance to get a job.
They can get basic utilities like electricity.
Their kids can get an education.
So what will it take to get started building the first charter cities, scaling this so we build many more?
It would help to have a manual.
(Laughter) What university professors could do is write some details that might go into this manual.
You wouldn't want to let us run the cities, go out and design them.
You wouldn't let academics out in the wild. (Laughter) But, you could set us to work thinking about questions like, suppose it isn't just Canada that does the deal with Raul Castro.
Perhaps Brazil comes in as a participant, and Spain as well. And perhaps Cuba wants to be one of the partners in a four-way joint venture.
How would we write the treaty to do that?
There is less precedent for that, but that could easily be worked out.
How would we finance this?
Turns out Singapore and Hong Kong are cities that made huge gains on the value of the land that they owned when they got started.
You could use the gains on the value of the land to pay for things like the police, the courts, but the school system and the health care system too, which make this a more attractive place to live, makes this a place where people have higher incomes -- which, incidentally, makes the land more valuable.
So the incentives for the people helping to construct this zone and build it, and set up the basic rules, go very much in the right direction.
So there are many other details like this.
How could we have buildings that are low cost and affordable for people who work in a first job, assembling something like an iPhone, but make those buildings energy efficient, and make sure that they are safe, so they don't fall down in an earthquake or a hurricane.
Many technical details to be worked out, but those of us who are already starting to pursue these things can already tell that there is no roadblock, there's no impediment, other than a failure of imagination, that will keep us from delivering on a truly global win-win solution.
Let me conclude with this picture.
The reason we can be so well off, even though there is so many people on earth, is because of the power of ideas.
We can share ideas with other people, and when they discover them, they share with us.
It's not like scarce objects, where sharing means we each get less.
When we share ideas we all get more.
When we think about ideas in that way, we usually think about technologies.
But there is another class of ideas: the rules that govern how we interact with each other; rules like, let's have a tax system that supports a research university that gives away certain kinds of knowledge for free.
Let's have a system where we have ownership of land that is registered in a government office, that people can pledge as collateral.
If we can keep innovating on our space of rules, and particularly innovate in the sense of coming up with rules for changing rules, so we don't get stuck with bad rules, then we can keep moving progress forward and truly make the world a better place, so that people like Nelson and his friends don't have to study any longer under the streetlights. Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to lead here by talking a little bit about my credentials to bring this up with you, because, quite honestly, you really, really should not listen to any old person with an opinion about COVID-19.
(Laughter) So I've been working in global health for about 20 years, and my specific technical specialty is in health systems and what happens when health systems experience severe shocks.
I've also worked in global health journalism; I've written about global health and biosecurity for newspapers and web outlets, and I published a book a few years back about the major global health threats facing us as a planet.
I have supported and led epidemiology efforts that range from evaluating Ebola treatment centers to looking at transmission of tuberculosis in health facilities and doing avian influenza preparedness.
I have a master's degree in International Health.
I'm not a physician. I'm not a nurse.
My specialty isn't patient care or taking care of individual people.
My specialty is looking at populations and health systems, what happens when diseases move on the large level.
If we're ranking sources of global health expertise on a scale of one to 10, one is some random person ranting on Facebook and 10 is the World Health Organization, I'd say you can probably put me at like a seven or an eight.
So keep that in mind as I talk to you.
I'll start with the basics here, because I think that's gotten lost in some of the media noise around COVID-19.
So, COVID-19 is a coronavirus.
Coronaviruses are a specific subset of virus, and they have some unique characteristics as viruses.
They use RNA instead of DNA as their genetic material, and they're covered in spikes on the surface of the virus.
They use those spikes to invade cells.
Those spikes are the corona in coronavirus.
COVID-19 is known as a novel coronavirus because, until December, we'd only heard of six coronaviruses.
COVID-19 is the seventh.
It's new to us.
It just had its gene sequencing, it just got its name.
That's why it's novel.
If you remember SARS, Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome, or MERS, Middle Eastern Respiratory Syndrome, those were coronaviruses.
And they're both called respiratory syndromes, because that's what coronaviruses do -- they go for your lungs.
They don't make you puke, they don't make you bleed from the eyeballs, they don't make you hemorrhage.
COVID-19 is no different.
It causes a range of respiratory symptoms that go from stuff like a dry cough and a fever all the way out to fatal viral pneumonia.
And that range of symptoms is one of the reasons it's actually been so hard to track this outbreak.
Plenty of people get COVID-19 but so gently, their symptoms are so mild, they don't even go to a health care provider.
They don't register in the system.
Children, in particular, have it very easy with COVID-19, which is something we should all be grateful for.
Coronaviruses are zoonotic, which means that they transmit from animals to people.
Some coronaviruses, like COVID-19, also transmit person to person.
The person-to-person ones travel faster and travel farther, just like COVID-19.
Zoonotic illnesses are really hard to get rid of, because they have an animal reservoir.
One example is avian influenza, where we can abolish it in farmed animals, in turkeys, in ducks, but it keeps coming back every year because it's brought to us by wild birds.
You don't hear a lot about it because avian influenza doesn't transmit person-to-person, but we have outbreaks in poultry farms every year all over the world.
COVID-19 most likely skipped from animals into people at a wild animal market in Wuhan, China.
Now for the less basic parts.
This is not the last major outbreak we're ever going to see.
There's going to be more outbreaks, and there's going to be more epidemics.
That's not a maybe. That's a given.
And it's a result of the way that we, as human beings, are interacting with our planet.
Human choices are driving us into a position where we're going to see more outbreaks.
Part of that is about climate change and the way a warming climate makes the world more hospitable to viruses and bacteria.
But it's also about the way we're pushing into the last wild spaces on our planet.
When we burn and plow the Amazon rain forest so that we can have cheap land for ranching, when the last of the African bush gets converted to farms, when wild animals in China are hunted to extinction, human beings come into contact with wildlife populations that they've never come into contact with before, and those populations have new kinds of diseases: bacteria, viruses, stuff we're not ready for.
Bats, in particular, have a knack for hosting illnesses that can infect people, but they're not the only animals that do it.
So as long as we keep making our remote places less remote, the outbreaks are going to keep coming.
We can't stop the outbreaks with quarantine or travel restrictions.
That's everybody's first impulse: "Let's stop the people from moving. Let's stop this outbreak from happening."
But the fact is, it's really hard to get a good quarantine in place.
It's really hard to set up travel restrictions.
Even the countries that have made serious investments in public health, like the US and South Korea, can't get that kind of restriction in place fast enough to actually stop an outbreak instantly.
There's logistical reasons for that, and there's medical reasons.
If you look at COVID-19 right now, it seems like it could have a period where you're infected and show no symptoms that's as long as 24 days.
So people are walking around with this virus showing no signs.
They're not going to get quarantined. Nobody knows they need quarantining.
There's also some real costs to quarantine and to travel restrictions.
Humans are social animals, and they resist when you try to hold them into place and when you try to separate them.
We saw in the Ebola outbreak that as soon as you put a quarantine in place, people start trying to evade it.
Individual patients, if they know there's a strict quarantine protocol, may not go for health care, because they're afraid of the medical system or they can't afford care and they don't want to be separated from their family and friends.
Politicians, government officials, when they know that they're going to get quarantined if they talk about outbreaks and cases, may conceal real information for fear of triggering a quarantine protocol.
And, of course, these kinds of evasions and dishonesty are exactly what makes it so difficult to track a disease outbreak.
We can get better at quarantines and travel restrictions, and we should, but they're not our only option, and they're not our best option for dealing with these situations.
The real way for the long haul to make outbreaks less serious is to build the global health system to support core health care functions in every country in the world so that all countries, even poor ones, are able to rapidly identify and treat new infectious diseases as they emerge.
China's taken a lot of criticism for its response to COVID-19.
But the fact is, what if COVID-19 had emerged in Chad, which has three and a half doctors for every hundred thousand people?
What if it had emerged in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which just released its last Ebola patient from treatment?
The truth is, countries like this don't have the resources to respond to an infectious disease -- not to treat people and not to report on it fast enough to help the rest of the world.
I led an evaluation of Ebola treatment centers in Sierra Leone, and the fact is that local doctors in Sierra Leone identified the Ebola crisis very quickly, first as a dangerous, contagious hemorrhagic virus and then as Ebola itself.
But, having identified it, they didn't have the resources to respond.
They didn't have enough doctors, they didn't have enough hospital beds and they didn't have enough information about how to treat Ebola or how to implement infection control.
Eleven doctors died in Sierra Leone of Ebola.
The country only had 120 when the crisis started.
By way of contrast, Dallas Baylor Medical Center has more than a thousand physicians on staff.
These are the kinds of inequities that kill people.
First, they kill the poor people when the outbreaks start, and then they kill people all over the world when the outbreaks spread.
If we really want to slow down these outbreaks and minimize their impact, we need to make sure that every country in the world has the capacity to identify new diseases, treat them and report about them so they can share information.
COVID-19 is going to be a huge burden on health systems.
COVID-19 has also revealed some real weaknesses in our global health supply chains.
Just-in-time-ordering, lean systems are great when things are going well, but in a time of crisis, what it means is we don't have any reserves.
If a hospital -- or a country -- runs out of face masks or personal protective equipment, there's no big warehouse full of boxes that we can go to to get more.
You have to order more from the supplier, you have to wait for them to produce it and you have to wait for them to ship it, generally from China.
That's a time lag at a time when it's most important to move quickly.
If we'd been perfectly prepared for COVID-19, China would have identified the outbreak faster.
They would have been ready to provide care to infected people without having to build new buildings.
They would have shared honest information with citizens so that we didn't see these crazy rumors spreading on social media in China.
And they would have shared information with global health authorities so that they could start reporting to national health systems and getting ready for when the virus spread.
National health systems would then have been able to stockpile the protective equipment they needed and train health care providers on treatment and infection control.
We'd have science-based protocols for what to do when things happen, like cruise ships have infected patients.
And we'd have real information going out to people everywhere, so we wouldn't see embarrassing, shameful incidents of xenophobia, like Asian-looking people getting attacked on the street in Philadelphia.
But even with all of that in place, we would still have outbreaks.
The choices we're making about how we occupy this planet make that inevitable.
As far as we have an expert consensus on COVID-19, it's this: here in the US, and globally, it's going to get worse before it gets better.
We're seeing cases of human transmission that aren't from returning travel, that are just happening in the community, and we're seeing people infected with COVID-19 when we don't even know where the infection came from.
Those are signs of an outbreak that's getting worse, not an outbreak that's under control.
It's depressing, but it's not surprising.
Global health experts, when they talk about the scenario of new viruses, this is one of the scenarios that they look at.
We all hoped we'd get off easy, but when experts talk about viral planning, this is the kind of situation and the way they expect the virus to move.
I want to close here with some personal advice.
Wash your hands.
Wash your hands a lot.
I know you already wash your hands a lot because you're not disgusting, but wash your hands even more.
Set up cues and routines in your life to get you to wash your hands.
Wash your hands every time you enter and leave a building.
Wash your hands when you go into a meeting and when you come out of a meeting.
Get rituals that are based around handwashing.
Sanitize your phone.
You touch that phone with your dirty, unwashed hands all the time.
I know you take it into the bathroom with you.
(Laughter) So sanitize your phone and consider not using it as often in public.
Maybe TikTok and Instagram can be home things only.
Don't touch your face.
Don't rub your eyes.
Don't bite your fingernails.
Don't wipe your nose on the back of your hand.
I mean, don't do that anyway because, gross.
(Laughter) Don't wear a face mask.
Face masks are for sick people and health care providers.
If you're sick, your face mask holds in all your coughing and sneezing and protects the people around you.
And if you're a health care provider, your face mask is one tool in a set of tools called personal protective equipment that you're trained to use so that you can give patient care and not get sick yourself.
If you're a regular healthy person wearing a face mask, it's just making your face sweaty.
(Laughter) Leave the face masks in stores for the doctors and the nurses and the sick people.
If you think you have symptoms of COVID-19, stay home, call your doctor for advice.
If you're diagnosed with COVID-19, remember it's generally very mild.
And if you're a smoker, right now is the best possible time to quit smoking.
I mean, if you're a smoker, right now is always the best possible time to quit smoking, but if you're a smoker and you're worried about COVID-19, I guarantee that quitting is absolutely the best thing you can do to protect yourself from the worst impacts of COVID-19.
COVID-19 is scary stuff, at a time when pretty much all of our news feels like scary stuff.
And there's a lot of bad but appealing options for dealing with it: panic, xenophobia, agoraphobia, authoritarianism, oversimplified lies that make us think that hate and fury and loneliness are the solution to outbreaks.
But they're not.
They just make us less prepared.
There's also a boring but useful set of options that we can use in response to outbreaks, things like improving health care here and everywhere; investing in health infrastructure and disease surveillance so that we know when the new diseases come; building health systems all over the world; looking at strengthening our supply chains so they're ready for emergencies; and better education, so we're capable of talking about disease outbreaks and the mathematics of risk without just blind panic.
We need to be guided by equity here, because in this situation, like so many, equity is actually in our own self-interest.
So thank you so much for listening to me today, and can I be the first one to tell you: wash your hands when you leave the theater.
(Applause)
[How can we control the coronavirus pandemic?] [From infectious disease expert Adam Kucharski] [Question 1: What does containment mean when it comes to outbreaks?] Containment is this idea that you can focus your effort on control very much on the cases and their contacts.
So you're not causing disruption to the wider population, you have a case that comes in, you isolate them, you work out who they've come into contact with, who's potentially these opportunities for exposure and then you can follow up those people, maybe quarantine them, to make sure that no further transmission happens.
So it's a very focused, targeted method, and for SARS, it worked remarkably well.
But I think for this infection, because some cases are going to be missed, or undetected, you've really got to be capturing a large chunk of people at risk.
If a few slip through the net, potentially, you're going to get an outbreak.
[Question 2: If containment isn't enough, what comes next?] In that respect, it would be about massive changes in our social interactions.
And so that would require, of the opportunities that could spread the virus so these kind of close contacts, everybody in the population, on average, will be needing to reduce those interactions potentially by two-thirds to bring it under control.
That might be through working from home, from changing lifestyle and kind of where you go in crowded places and dinners.
And of course, these measures, things like school closures, and other things that just attempt to reduce the social mixing of a population.
[Question 3: What are the risks that we need people to think about?] It's not just whose hand you shake, it's whose hand that person goes on to shake.
And I think we need to think about these second-degree steps, that you might think you have low risk and you're in a younger group, but you're often going to be a very short step away from someone who is going to get hit very hard by this.
And I think we really need to be socially minded and think this could be quite dramatic in terms of change of behavior, but it needs to be to reduce the impact that we're potentially facing.
[Question 4: How far apart should people stay from each other?] I think it's hard to pin down exactly, but I think one thing to bear in mind is that there's not so much evidence that this is a kind of aerosol and it goes really far -- it's reasonably short distances.
I don't think it's the case that you're sitting a few meters away from someone and the virus is somehow going to get across.
It's in closer interactions, and it's why we're seeing so many transmission events occur in things like meals and really tight-knit groups.
Because if you imagine that's where you can get a virus out and onto surfaces and onto hands and onto faces, and it's really situations like that we've got to think more about.
[Question 5: What kind of protective measures should countries put in place?] I think that's what people are trying to piece together, first in terms of what works.
It's only really in the last sort of few weeks we've got a sense that this thing can be controllable with this extent of interventions, but of course, not all countries can do what China have done, some of these measures incur a huge social, economic, psychological burden on populations.
And of course, there's the time limit.
In China, they've had them in for six weeks, it's tough to maintain that, so we need to think of these tradeoffs of all the things we can ask people to do, what's going to have the most impact on actually reducing the burden.
[To learn more, visit: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] [World Health Organization]
In 1958, Rachel Carson received a letter describing songbirds suddenly dropping from tree branches.
The writer blamed their deaths on a pesticide called DDT that exterminators had sprayed on a nearby marsh.
The letter was the push Carson needed to investigate DDT.
She had already heard from scientists and conservationists who were worried that rampant use of the pesticide posed a threat to fish, birds, and possibly humans.
She began to make inquiries through government contacts from her years working in the United States Bureau of Fisheries.
She asked: “what has already silenced the voices of spring?” In 1962, Carson published her findings in "Silent Spring."
Her book documented the misuse of chemicals and their toll on nature and human health.
"Silent Spring" immediately drew both applause and impassioned dissent— along with vicious personal attacks on the author.
How did this mild-mannered biologist and writer ignite such controversy?
Carson began her career as a hardworking graduate student, balancing her studies in biology at John Hopkins University with part time jobs.
Still, she had to leave school before completing her doctorate to provide for her ailing father and sister.
Carson found part time work with the Bureau of Fisheries writing for a radio program on marine biology.
Her ability to write materials that could hold the general public’s attention impressed her superiors, and in 1936, she became the second woman to be hired at the Bureau full time.
In 1941, she published the first of three books on the ocean, combining science with lyrical meditations on underwater worlds.
These explorations resonated with a wide audience.
In "Silent Spring," Carson turned her attention to the ways human actions threaten the balance of nature.
DDT was originally used during World War II to shield crops from insects and protect soldiers from insect-borne diseases.
After the war, it was routinely sprayed in wide swaths to fight pests, often with unforeseen results.
One attempt to eradicate fire ants in the southern U.S.
killed wildlife indiscriminately, but did little to eliminate the ants.
In spite of this and other mishaps, the US Department of Agriculture and chemical companies extolled the benefits of DDT.
There was little regulation or public awareness about its potential harm.
But Carson showed how the overuse of chemicals led to the evolution of resistant species— which, in turn, encouraged the development of deadlier chemicals.
Since DDT does not dissolve in water, she asserted that over time it would accumulate in the environment, the bodies of insects, the tissues of animals who consume those insects, and eventually humans.
She suggested that exposure to DDT might alter the structure of genes, with unknown consequences for future generations.
The response to "Silent Spring" was explosive.
For many people the book was a call to regulate substances capable of catastrophic harm.
Others objected that Carson hadn’t mentioned DDT’s role controlling the threat insects posed to human health.
Former Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson demanded to know “why a spinster with no children was so concerned about genetics?” and dismissed Carson as “probably a Communist.” A lawyer for a pesticide manufacturer alluded to Carson and her supporters as “sinister influences” aiming to paint businesses as “immoral.” In reality, Carson had focused on the dangers of chemicals because they weren’t widely understood, while the merits were well publicized.
She rejected the prevailing belief that humans should and could control nature.
Instead, she challenged people to cultivate “maturity and mastery, not of nature, but of ourselves.” Carson died of cancer in 1964, only two years after the publication of "Silent Spring."
Her work galvanized a generation of environmental activists.
In 1969, under pressure from environmentalists, Congress passed the National Environmental Policy Act that required federal agencies to evaluate environmental impacts of their actions.
To enforce the act, President Richard Nixon created the Environmental Protection Agency.
And in 1972, the EPA issued a partial ban on the use of DDT.
Long after her death, Rachel Carson continued to advocate for nature through the lingering impact of her writing.
If you haven't ordered yet, I generally find the rigatoni with the spicy tomato sauce goes best with diseases of the small intestine.
(Laughter) So, sorry -- it just feels like I should be doing stand-up up here because of the setting.
No, what I want to do is take you back to 1854 in London for the next few minutes, and tell the story -- in brief -- of this outbreak, which in many ways, I think, helped create the world that we live in today, and particularly the kind of city that we live in today.
This period in 1854, in the middle part of the 19th century, in London's history, is incredibly interesting for a number of reasons.
But I think the most important one is that London was this city of 2.5 million people, and it was the largest city on the face of the planet at that point.
But it was also the largest city that had ever been built.
And so the Victorians were trying to live through and simultaneously invent a whole new scale of living: this scale of living that we, you know, now call "metropolitan living."
And it was in many ways, at this point in the mid-1850s, a complete disaster.
They were basically a city living with a modern kind of industrial metropolis with an Elizabethan public infrastructure.
So people, for instance, just to gross you out for a second, had cesspools of human waste in their basement. Like, a foot to two feet deep.
And they would just kind of throw the buckets down there and hope that it would somehow go away, and of course it never really would go away.
And all of this stuff, basically, had accumulated to the point where the city was incredibly offensive to just walk around in.
It was an amazingly smelly city. Not just because of the cesspools, but also the sheer number of livestock in the city would shock people.
Not just the horses, but people had cows in their attics that they would use for milk, that they would hoist up there and keep them in the attic until literally their milk ran out and they died, and then they would drag them off to the bone boilers down the street.
So, you would just walk around London at this point and just be overwhelmed with this stench.
And what ended up happening is that an entire emerging public health system became convinced that it was the smell that was killing everybody, that was creating these diseases that would wipe through the city every three or four years.
And cholera was really the great killer of this period.
It arrived in London in 1832, and every four or five years another epidemic would take 10,000, 20,000 people in London and throughout the U.K.
And so the authorities became convinced that this smell was this problem.
We had to get rid of the smell.
And so, in fact, they concocted a couple of early, you know, founding public-health interventions in the system of the city, one of which was called the "Nuisances Act," which they got everybody as far as they could to empty out their cesspools and just pour all that waste into the river.
Because if we get it out of the streets, it'll smell much better, and -- oh right, we drink from the river.
So what ended up happening, actually, is they ended up increasing the outbreaks of cholera because, as we now know, cholera is actually in the water.
It's a waterborne disease, not something that's in the air.
It's not something you smell or inhale; it's something you ingest.
And so one of the founding moments of public health in the 19th century effectively poisoned the water supply of London much more effectively than any modern day bioterrorist could have ever dreamed of doing.
So this was the state of London in 1854, and in the middle of all this carnage and offensive conditions, and in the midst of all this scientific confusion about what was actually killing people, it was a very talented classic 19th century multi-disciplinarian named John Snow, who was a local doctor in Soho in London, who had been arguing for about four or five years that cholera was, in fact, a waterborne disease, and had basically convinced nobody of this.
The public health authorities had largely ignored what he had to say.
And he'd made the case in a number of papers and done a number of studies, but nothing had really stuck.
And part of -- what's so interesting about this story to me is that in some ways, it's a great case study in how cultural change happens, how a good idea eventually comes to win out over much worse ideas.
And Snow labored for a long time with this great insight that everybody ignored.
And then on one day, August 28th of 1854, a young child, a five-month-old girl whose first name we don't know, we know her only as Baby Lewis, somehow contracted cholera, came down with cholera at 40 Broad Street.
You can't really see it in this map, but this is the map that becomes the central focus in the second half of my book.
It's in the middle of Soho, in this working class neighborhood, this little girl becomes sick and it turns out that the cesspool, that they still continue to have, despite the Nuisances Act, bordered on an extremely popular water pump, local watering hole that was well known for the best water in all of Soho, that all the residents from Soho and the surrounding neighborhoods would go to.
And so this little girl inadvertently ended up contaminating the water in this popular pump, and one of the most terrifying outbreaks in the history of England erupted about two or three days later.
Literally, 10 percent of the neighborhood died in seven days, and much more would have died if people hadn't fled after the initial outbreak kicked in.
So it was this incredibly terrifying event.
You had these scenes of entire families dying over the course of 48 hours of cholera, alone in their one-room apartments, in their little flats.
Just an extraordinary, terrifying scene.
Snow lived near there, heard about the outbreak, and in this amazing act of courage went directly into the belly of the beast because he thought an outbreak that concentrated could actually potentially end up convincing people that, in fact, the real menace of cholera was in the water supply and not in the air.
He suspected an outbreak that concentrated would probably involve a single point source.
One single thing that everybody was going to because it didn't have the traditional slower path of infections that you might expect.
And so he went right in there and started interviewing people.
He eventually enlisted the help of this amazing other figure, who's kind of the other protagonist of the book -- this guy, Henry Whitehead, who was a local minister, who was not at all a man of science, but was incredibly socially connected; he knew everybody in the neighborhood.
And he managed to track down, Whitehead did, many of the cases of people who had drunk water from the pump, or who hadn't drunk water from the pump.
And eventually Snow made a map of the outbreak.
He found increasingly that people who drank from the pump were getting sick.
People who hadn't drunk from the pump were not getting sick.
And he thought about representing that as a kind of a table of statistics of people living in different neighborhoods, people who hadn't, you know, percentages of people who hadn't, but eventually he hit upon the idea that what he needed was something that you could see.
Something that would take in a sense a higher-level view of all this activity that had been happening in the neighborhood.
And so he created this map, which basically ended up representing all the deaths in the neighborhoods as black bars at each address.
And you can see in this map, the pump right at the center of it and you can see that one of the residences down the way had about 15 people dead.
And the map is actually a little bit bigger.
As you get further and further away from the pump, the deaths begin to grow less and less frequent.
And so you can see this something poisonous emanating out of this pump that you could see in a glance.
And so, with the help of this map, and with the help of more evangelizing that he did over the next few years and that Whitehead did, eventually, actually, the authorities slowly started to come around.
It took much longer than sometimes we like to think in this story, but by 1866, when the next big cholera outbreak came to London, the authorities had been convinced -- in part because of this story, in part because of this map -- that in fact the water was the problem.
And they had already started building the sewers in London, and they immediately went to this outbreak and they told everybody to start boiling their water.
And that was the last time that London has seen a cholera outbreak since.
So, part of this story, I think -- well, it's a terrifying story, it's a very dark story and it's a story that continues on in many of the developing cities of the world.
It's also a story really that is fundamentally optimistic, which is to say that it's possible to solve these problems if we listen to reason, if we listen to the kind of wisdom of these kinds of maps, if we listen to people like Snow and Whitehead, if we listen to the locals who understand what's going on in these kinds of situations.
And what it ended up doing is making the idea of large-scale metropolitan living a sustainable one.
When people were looking at 10 percent of their neighborhoods dying in the space of seven days, there was a widespread consensus that this couldn't go on, that people weren't meant to live in cities of 2.5 million people.
But because of what Snow did, because of this map, because of the whole series of reforms that happened in the wake of this map, we now take for granted that cities have 10 million people, cities like this one are in fact sustainable things.
We don't worry that New York City is going to collapse in on itself quite the way that, you know, Rome did, and be 10 percent of its size in 100 years or 200 years.
And so that in a way is the ultimate legacy of this map.
It's a map of deaths that ended up creating a whole new way of life, the life that we're enjoying here today. Thank you very much.
There's an old saying, "Just because you can't see something, doesn't mean it's not there."
My work is -- it's a reflection of myself.
What I wanted to do is to show the world that the little things can be the biggest things.
We all seem to think that, you know, if we look down on the ground, there's nothing there.
And we use the word "nothing."
Nothing doesn't exist, because there is always something.
My mother told me that, when I was a child, that I should always respect the little things.
What made me do this work? I shall go into my story.
This all started when I was age five.
What made me do it? At school, I will admit this: academically, I couldn't express myself.
So I was, more or less, classed as "nothing."
My world was seen as less.
So I decided I didn't really want to be a part of that world.
I thought, I need to retreat into something else.
So when my mother used to take me to school, she thought I was at school, and I used to do a U-turn, when her back was turned, and run off and hide in the shed at the back of the garden.
Now, the one time I was in the shed, and my mother suspected something, thinking I was at school.
My mother was like the woman in Tom and Jerry.
So you'd just see her feet.
(Laughter) So I was hiding in the shed, like that.
And all of a sudden ...
And then I saw her legs.
And then she said -- grabbed me like that, because my mother was quite big -- and she lifted me up and she says, "How come you're not at school?"
I told her I couldn't face it because the way the teacher was treating me, ridiculing me, and using me as an example of failure.
So I told her.
At that age, obviously, I couldn't express it that way, but I told her I didn't feel right.
And then she just said, "You're going back to school tomorrow."
And walked off. And I didn't expect that, because I expected one of these ...
But I didn't get it.
So I'm sitting there thinking.
And as I looked down on the ground, I noticed there was some ants running around.
And I went into this little fantasy world.
And I thought, "These ants, are they looking for the queen ant?
Or do they need somewhere to live?"
So I thought "Perhaps, if I made these ants some apartments, they'll move in."
(Laughter) So I did.
And how I set about that, I got some splinters of wood.
And I sliced the little splinters of wood with a broken shard of glass, constructed this little apartment.
Well it looked like a little shanty shed when I'd finished.
But I thought, perhaps the ant won't know, it'll probably move in.
And so they did.
That was a bit crude, at the time. And I made all these little apartments and little merry-go-rounds, seesaws and swings, little ladders.
And then I encouraged the ants to come 'round by putting sugar and things like that.
And then I sat down and all the ants came along.
And all I could hear was "Is this for us?"
(Laughter) And I say, "Yes, they're all for you."
And they moved in, and decided not to pay me any rent.
(Laughter) And from there I was watching this little world.
It became part of me.
When I discovered that I had this gift, I wanted to experiment with this world that we can't see.
So I realized that there was more to life than just everything that we see around us that's huge.
So I started to educate myself on this molecular level.
And as I got older, I continued. I showed my mother.
My mother told me to take it smaller.
Now I shall show you something here.
And I'll explain.
As you can see, that's a pinhead.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now that is called the Huf Haus.
The gentleman who commissioned me to do this was a gentleman called Peter Huf.
And he says to me "Willard, can you put my house on a pinhead?"
(Laughter) So I say, "How are you going to fit in there?"
(Laughter) And then he said to me, "I don't believe you can do it. Can you really do it?"
And I says, "Well, try me."
And then he said, "But I don't believe that you can do this." So I said, "OK."
So, to cut a long story short, I went home, went underneath the microscope, and I crushed up a piece of glass, crushed it up.
And underneath the microscope there were splinters of glass.
Some of them were quite jagged.
So I was crushing up these pieces of glass, which, as you can see, that's the actual frame of the house.
And the actual roof is made up of a fiber, which I found in my sister's old teddy bear.
(Laughter) So I got the teddy bear and I said, "Do you mind if I pull out one of your fibers?"
So I did.
And I looked at it beneath the microscope. And some of it was flat.
So I decided to slice these up with the tool that I make by -- I sharpen the end of a needle into a blade.
And then I actually slow down my whole nervous system.
And then I work between my heartbeat, I have one-and-a-half seconds to actually move.
And at the same time I have to watch I don't inhale my own work, at the same time.
(Laughter) (Applause) Because that has happened to me.
(Laughter) So what I did, like I said, come back to the glass.
I found these little bits of glass.
And I had to make them square.
So I'm thinking "How can I do this?"
So what I did, I got an oilstone. Broke the edge of an oilstone off.
And what I did, I took pieces of glass. And I started to rub them.
I used a little tweezer which I made from a hair clip.
And I built rubber around the end of the tweezer so it wouldn't crush the glass.
And then I started rubbing, very very gently, till some of the edges were quite square. And then I constructed it.
And how I constructed it, is by making grooves in the top of the pinhead.
And then pushing the glass in with its own friction.
And as I was doing it, what happened?
The instrument that I used turned into a catapult.
And it went like this ...
And then that was it.
(Laughter) Gone.
So I'm thinking, "Mr. Huf isn't going to be very happy when I told him his house has gone to another, into the atmosphere somewhere."
So to cut the story short, I decided that I had to go back and do it.
So I found some more. And I decided to, sort of, construct it very, very slowly, holding my breath, working between my heartbeat, and making sure everything is leveled.
Because it's such a small sculpture, nothing can go wrong.
And I decided to build it up.
Then I used fibers out of my jumper, which I held and stretched.
And made the beams going around the house.
And the actual windows and the balcony had to be sort of constructed.
I used a money spider's web to actually attach certain things, which sent me insane.
But I managed to do it.
And when I finished it, I came back the next day.
I noticed that the house was occupied.
Have we ever heard of a dust mite?
Darren dust mite and his family moved in.
(Laughter) So basically I'd completed the house.
And there you are.
(Applause) (Laughter) Right. As you can see, Bart Simpson is having a little argument.
I think they're arguing about the space on the pin.
There's not enough room for the two of them.
So I didn't think he was going to throw Bart off.
I think he was just warning him actually.
But this one was made out of a nylon tag out of my shirt.
What I did, I plucked the tag out and put it underneath the microscope.
I used the needle which has got a slight blade on the end.
Can anybody see the blade on the end of that needle?
Audience: No.
WW: So what I did is the same process where I just kind of hold my breath and just work away very, very slowly, manipulating the plastic, cutting it, because it behaves different.
Whenever you work on that level, things behave different.
Because it's on this molecular level things change and they act different.
And sometimes they turn into little catapults and things go up in the air.
And, you know, all different things happen.
But I had to make a little barrier, going around it, out of cellophane, to stop it moving.
Then static electricity set in.
And it went ...
And I'm trying to remove it. And the static is interfering with everything.
So there is sweat dripping off my head, because I have to carve Homer Simpson like that, in that position.
And after I've cut out the shape, then I have to make sure that there is room for Bart's neck.
So after I've done the same thing, then I have to paint it.
And after I've actually sculpted them, I have to paint them.
I experimented with a -- I found a dead fly.
And I plucked the hair off the fly's head.
Decided to make a paintbrush.
(Laughter) But I would never do it to a living fly.
(Laughter) Because I've heard a fly in pain.
And they go "Meow! Ow!"
Even though they get on our nerves, I would never kill an insect because, "All creatures great and small" -- there is a hymn that says that.
So what I decided to do is to pluck fine hair out of my face.
And I looked at it underneath the microscope.
That was the paintbrush.
And whilst I'm painting I have to be very careful, because the paint starts to turn into little blobs.
And it starts to dry very quickly.
So I have to be very quick.
If I'm not, it will end up looking not like what it's supposed to look like.
It could end up looking like Humpty Dumpty or somebody else.
So I have to be very very careful.
This one took me approximately, I would say, six to seven weeks.
My work, rough estimate, sometimes five, six to seven weeks; you can't always anticipate.
(Applause) As you can see, that's Charlton Heston brought down to size.
(Laughter) He says to me, "Willard" -- You can see him saying, "Why me?"
I says, "I enjoyed your film. That's why."
As you can see, there's an aphid fly there.
That's just to show the scale and the actual size of the sculpture.
I would say it probably measures ...
a quarter of a millimeter.
In America they say a period stop.
So say if you cut a period stop in half, a full stop, that's about the size of the whole thing.
It's made -- the chariot is made of gold.
And Charlton Heston is made of a floating fiber, which I took out of the air.
When the sunlight comes through the window you see these little fibers.
And what I normally do is walk 'round a room -- (Laughter) -- trying to find one. And then I put it underneath the microscope.
I remember one time I was doing it, and the window was open.
And there was a lady standing by the bus stop.
And she saw me walking around like this.
(Laughter) And then she looked at me.
And then I went ...
And then she went, "Hmm, OK, he's not mad."
Yeah, to actually do this thing -- the actual chariot is made of gold.
I had a 24-karat gold ring.
And I cut off a little flake of gold.
And I bent it 'round, and made it into the chariot.
And the horse is made from nylon.
And the spider's web is for the reins on the horse.
To get the symmetrical shape of the horse was very difficult, because I had to get the horse to rear up and look as though it was in some kind of action.
When I did this one, a gentleman seen it and said to me, "There's no way you can do this, you must have used some kind of machine.
There's no way a man can do that.
It must be a machine."
So I says, "OK then, if you say it's a machine ..."
(Laughter) (Applause) That one took me approximately six weeks.
(Applause) The most famous statue in the world.
This one, I would say, was a serious challenge.
(Laughter) Because I had to put the torch on the top.
That one is, more or less, the same type of process.
The bottom of it is carved from a grain of sand, because I wanted to get a bit of the stone effect.
I used a microscopic shard of diamond to actually carve the actual base.
Well, I can look at this one and I can be very proud of this, because that statue has always sort of kept an image in my head of, you know, the beginning of people coming to America.
So it's sort of Ellis Island, and seeing America for the first time.
And that's the first thing they saw.
So I wanted to have that little image.
And this is it.
(Laughter) And we all know that is the Hulk.
I wanted to create movement in the eye of a needle.
Because we know we see needles, but people aren't familiar with the eye of a needle apart from putting a thread through it.
So I broke the needle.
And made a needle look like the Hulk's broken it.
It's -- I had to make little holes in the base of the needle, to shove his feet in.
So most of my work, I don't use glue.
They go in with their own friction.
And that's how I managed to do it.
As you can see, he's looking at the moment. He's got a little grimace on his face.
And his mouth must be probably about three microns.
So the eyes are probably about one micron or something.
That ship there, that's made from 24-karat gold.
And I normally rig it with the web of a money spider.
But I had to rig it with strands of glue.
Because the web of the spider, it was sending me insane, because I couldn't get the web to move off.
And that's 24-karat gold. And it's constructed. I built it.
Constructed each plank of gold.
And the whole thing is sort of symmetrical.
The flag had to be made out of little strands of gold.
It's almost like doing a surgical operation to get this thing right.
(Applause) As you can see, dressage.
(Laughter) It's something I wanted to do just to show how I could get the symmetrical shape.
The actual rigging on the reins on the horse are made from the same sort of thing.
And that was done with a particle from my shirt.
And the pinhead I've made green around there by scraping the particles off a green shirt and then pressed onto the needle.
It's very painstaking work, but the best things come in small packages.
(Laughter) Bruno Giussani: Willard Wigan!
(Applause)
In 1165, copies of a strange letter began to circulate throughout Western Europe.
It spoke of a fantastical realm, containing the Tower of Babel and the Fountain of Youth— all ruled over by the letter’s mysterious author: Prester John.
Today, we know that this extraordinary king never existed.
But the legend of this mythical kingdom and its powerful ruler would impact the decisions of European leaders for the next 400 years.
Prester John’s myth would propel the age of exploration, inspire intercontinental diplomacy, and indirectly begin a civil war.
When Prester John’s letter appeared, Europe was embroiled in the Crusades.
In this series of religious wars, Europeans campaigned to seize what they regarded as the Christian Holy Land.
The Church vilified any faith outside of Christianity, including that of the Jewish and Muslim communities populating the region.
Crusaders were eager to find Christian kingdoms to serve as allies in their war.
And they were particularly interested in rumors of a powerful Christian king who had defeated an enormous Muslim army in the Far East.
In fact, it was a Mongol horde including converted Christian tribes that had routed the army.
But news of this victory traveled unreliably.
Merchants and emissaries filled gaps in the story with epic poems and Biblical fragments.
By the time the story reached Europe, the Mongol horde had been replaced with a great Christian army, commanded by a king who shared the Crusader’s vision of marching on Jerusalem.
And when a letter allegedly written by this so-called “Prester John” appeared, European rulers were thrilled.
While the letter’s actual author remains unknown, its stereotypes about the East and alignment with European goals indicate it was a Western forgery.
But despite the letter’s obvious origins as European propaganda, the appeal of Prester John’s myth was too great for the Crusaders to ignore.
Before long, European mapmakers were guessing the location of his mythical kingdom.
In the 13th and 14th centuries, European missionaries went East, along the newly revived Silk Road.
They weren’t searching for the letter’s author, who would have been over a century old; but rather, for his descendants.
The title of Prester John was briefly identified with several Central Asian rulers, but it soon became clear that the Mongols were largely non-Christian.
And as their Empire began to decline, Europeans began pursuing alternate routes to the Far East, and new clues to Prester John’s location.
At the same time these explorers went south, Ethiopian pilgrims began traveling north.
In Rome, these visitors quickly attracted the interest of European scholars and cartographers.
Since Ethiopia had been converted to Christianity in the 4th century, the stories of their African homeland fit perfectly into Prester John’s legend.
Portuguese explorers scoured Africa for the kingdom, until a mix of confusion and diplomacy finally turned myth into reality.
The Ethiopians graciously received their European guests, who were eager to do business with the ruler they believed to be Prester John.
Though the Ethiopians were initially confused by the Portuguese’s unusual name for their Emperor, they were savvy enough to recognize the diplomatic capital it afforded them.
The Ethiopian diplomats played the part of Prester John’s subjects, and the Portuguese triumphantly announced an alliance with the fabled sovereign— over 350 years after the European letter had begun the search.
But this long-awaited partnership was quickly tested.
A decade later, the Sultanate of Adal, a regional power supported by the Ottoman Empire, invaded Ethiopia.
The Portuguese sent troops that helped Ethiopians win this conflict.
But by this time, it was clear that Ethiopia was not the powerful ally Europe had hoped.
Worse still, the increasingly intolerant Roman Catholic Church now deemed the Ethiopian sect of Christianity heretical.
Their subsequent attempts to convert the people they once revered as ideal Christians would eventually spark a civil war, and in the 1630s, Ethiopia cut ties with Europe.
Over the next two centuries, the legend of Prester John slowly faded into oblivion— ending the reign of a king who made history despite having never existed.
Good morning everybody.
I'd like to talk about a couple of things today.
The first thing is water.
Now I see you've all been enjoying the water that's been provided for you here at the conference, over the past couple of days.
And I'm sure you'll feel that it's from a safe source.
But what if it wasn't?
What if it was from a source like this?
Then statistics would actually say that half of you would now be suffering with diarrhea.
I talked a lot in the past about statistics, and the provision of safe drinking water for all.
But they just don't seem to get through.
And I think I've worked out why.
It's because, using current thinking, the scale of the problem just seems too huge to contemplate solving.
So we just switch off: us, governments and aid agencies.
Well, today, I'd like to show you that through thinking differently, the problem has been solved.
By the way, since I've been speaking, another 13,000 people around the world are suffering now with diarrhea.
And four children have just died.
I invented Lifesaver bottle because I got angry.
I, like most of you, was sitting down, the day after Christmas in 2004, when I was watching the devastating news of the Asian tsunami as it rolled in, playing out on TV.
The days and weeks that followed, people fleeing to the hills, being forced to drink contaminated water or face death.
That really stuck with me.
Then, a few months later, Hurricane Katrina slammed into the side of America.
"Okay," I thought, "here's a First World country, let's see what they can do."
Day one: nothing.
Day two: nothing.
Do you know it took five days to get water to the Superdome?
People were shooting each other on the streets for TV sets and water.
That's when I decided I had to do something.
Now I spent a lot of time in my garage, over the next weeks and months, and also in my kitchen -- much to the dismay of my wife. (Laughter) However, after a few failed prototypes, I finally came up with this, the Lifesaver bottle.
Okay, now for the science bit.
Before Lifesaver, the best hand filters were only capable of filtering down to about 200 nanometers.
The smallest bacteria is about 200 nanometers.
So a 200-nanometer bacteria is going to get through a 200-nanometer hole.
The smallest virus, on the other hand, is about 25 nanometers.
So that's definitely going to get through those 200 nanometer holes.
Lifesaver pores are 15 nanometers.
So nothing is getting through.
Okay, I'm going to give you a bit of a demonstration.
Would you like to see that?
I spent all the time setting this up, so I guess I should.
We're in the fine city of Oxford.
So -- someone's done that up.
Fine city of Oxford, so what I've done is I've gone and got some water from the River Cherwell, and the River Thames, that flow through here. And this is the water.
But I got to thinking, you know, if we were in the middle of a flood zone in Bangladesh, the water wouldn't look like this.
So I've gone and got some stuff to add into it.
And this is from my pond.
(Sniffs) (Coughs) Have a smell of that, mister cameraman.
Okay. (Laughs) Right.
We're just going to pour that in there.
Audience: Ugh!
Michael Pritchard: Okay. We've got some runoff from a sewage plant farm.
So I'm just going to put that in there.
(Laughter) Put that in there. There we go.
(Laughter) And some other bits and pieces, chuck that in there.
And I've got a gift here from a friend of mine's rabbit.
So we're just going to put that in there as well.
(Laughter) Okay. (Laughter) Now.
The Lifesaver bottle works really simply.
You just scoop the water up.
Today I'm going to use a jug just to show you all. Let's get a bit of that poo in there.
That's not dirty enough. Let's just stir that up a little bit.
Okay, so I'm going to take this really filthy water, and put it in here. Do you want a drink yet?
(Laughter) Okay. There we go.
Replace the top.
Give it a few pumps. Okay?
That's all that's necessary.
Now as soon as I pop the teat, sterile drinking water is going to come out.
I've got to be quick. Okay, ready?
There we go. Mind the electrics.
That is safe, sterile drinking water.
(Applause) Cheers.
(Applause) There you go Chris.
(Applause) What's it taste of?
Chris Anderson: Delicious.
Michael Pritchard: Okay.
Let's see Chris's program throughout the rest of the show. Okay?
(Laughter) Okay. Lifesaver bottle is used by thousands of people around the world.
It'll last for 6,000 liters.
And when it's expired, using failsafe technology, the system will shut off, protecting the user.
Pop the cartridge out. Pop a new one in.
It's good for another 6,000 liters.
So let's look at the applications.
Traditionally, in a crisis, what do we do?
We ship water.
Then, after a few weeks, we set up camps.
And people are forced to come into the camps to get their safe drinking water.
What happens when 20,000 people congregate in a camp?
Diseases spread. More resources are required.
The problem just becomes self-perpetuating.
But by thinking differently, and shipping these, people can stay put.
They can make their own sterile drinking water, and start to get on with rebuilding their homes and their lives.
Now, it doesn't require a natural disaster for this to work.
Using the old thinking, of national infrastructure and pipe work, is too expensive.
When you run the numbers on a calculator, you run out of noughts.
So here is the "thinking different" bit.
Instead of shipping water, and using man-made processes to do it, let's use Mother Nature. She's got a fantastic system.
She picks the water up from there, desalinates it, for free, transports it over there, and dumps it onto the mountains, rivers, and streams.
And where do people live? Near water.
All we've go to do is make it sterile. How do we do that?
Well, we could use the Lifesaver bottle.
Or we could use one of these.
The same technology, in a jerry can.
This will process 25,000 liters of water; that's good enough for a family of four, for three years.
And how much does it cost?
About half a cent a day to run.
Thank you.
(Applause) So, by thinking differently, and processing water at the point of use, mothers and children no longer have to walk four hours a day to collect their water.
They can get it from a source nearby.
So with just eight billion dollars, we can hit the millennium goal's target of halving the number of people without access to safe drinking water.
To put that into context, The U.K. government spends about 12 billion pounds a year on foreign aid.
But why stop there?
With 20 billion dollars, everyone can have access to safe drinking water.
So the three-and-a-half billion people that suffer every year as a result, and the two million kids that die every year, will live.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In January of 1953, a tidal surge shook the North Sea.
The titanic waves flooded the Dutch coastline, killing almost 2,000 people.
54 years later, a similar storm threatened the region.
But this time, the Netherlands were ready.
As the water swelled, state-of-the-art computer sensors activated emergency protocols.
Over the next 30 minutes, a pair of 240-meter steel arms swung shut, protecting the channel ahead.
Using 680-tonne ball joints, the barrier moved in rhythm with the shifting wind and waves.
By morning, the storm had passed with minimal flooding.
The first field activation of the Maeslantkering had been a resounding success.
As one of the planet’s largest mobile structures, this storm surge barrier is a marvel of human engineering.
But the Maeslantkering is just one part of a massive, interlocking system of water controls known as the Delta Works— the most sophisticated flood prevention project in the world.
The Netherlands has a long history with water management.
The country lies along the delta of three major European rivers, and nearly a quarter of its territory is below sea level.
This geography makes the region extremely prone to flooding.
So much so, that some of the earliest Dutch governing bodies were informal “water boards” that coordinated flood protection projects.
But after the storms of 1953, the Dutch government took more official measures.
They established the Delta Commission, and tasked them with protecting the entire southwestern region.
Focusing on densely populated cities, their aim was to reduce the annual odds of flooding below 1 in 10,000— about 100 times as safe as the average coastal city.
Accomplishing this lofty goal required various infrastructure projects along the southwestern coast.
The first line of defense was to dam the region’s flood-prone estuaries.
These large inlets fed many of the country’s rivers into the North Sea, and during storms they allowed flood water to surge inland.
Using a series of dams, the Delta Commission transformed these estuaries into expansive lakes that serve as nature preserves and community parks.
However, this solution wouldn’t work for the Nieuwe Waterweg.
As the lifeblood of the local shipping industry, this passage had to be kept open in safe conditions, and barricaded during storm surges.
In 1998, the completed Maeslantkering provided the flexible protection necessary.
Alongside additional barriers, like grassy dikes and concrete seawalls, these fortifications made up the bulk of the Delta Works project, which was primarily focused on holding back ocean storms.
But in the following decades, the Dutch pursued additional plans to complement the Delta Works and protect against floods further inland.
Under the "Room for the River" plan, farms and dikes were relocated away from the shore.
This left more space for water to collect in low-lying floodplains, creating reservoirs and habitats for local wildlife.
This strategic retreat not only decreased flood risk, but allowed for the redeveloped settlements to be built more densely and sustainably.
Perhaps no city embodies the Netherlands' multi-pronged approach to water management as much as Rotterdam, a thriving city almost entirely below sea level.
When a storm threatens, densely populated older districts are protected by traditional dikes.
Meanwhile, newer districts have been artificially elevated, often sporting green roofs that store rainwater.
Numerous structures around the city transform into water storage facilities, including parking garages and plazas which normally serve as theaters and sports arenas.
Meanwhile in the harbor, floating pavilions rise with the water level.
These are the first of several planned amphibious structures, some of which house water purification systems and solar collectors.
These strategies are just some of the technologies and policies that have put the Netherlands at the cutting edge of water management.
The country continues to find new ways to make cities more resilient to natural disasters.
And as the rising sea levels caused by climate change threaten low-lying cities across the world, the Netherlands offers an exceptional example of how to go with the flow.
4,300 years ago in ancient Sumer, the most powerful person in the city of Ur was banished to wander the vast desert.
Her name was Enheduanna.
She was the high priestess of the moon god and history’s first known author.
By the time of her exile, she had written 42 hymns and three epic poems— and Sumer hadn’t heard the last of her.
Enheduanna lived 1,700 years before Sappho, 1,500 years before Homer, and about 500 years before the biblical patriarch Abraham.
She was born in Mesopotamia, the land between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, and the birthplace of the first cities and high cultures.
Her father was King Sargon the Great, history’s first empire builder, who conquered the independent city-states of Mesopotamia under a unified banner.
Sargon was a northern Semite who spoke Akkadian, and the older Sumerian cities in the south viewed him as a foreign invader.
They frequently revolted to regain their independence, fracturing his new dynasty.
To bridge the gap between cultures, Sargon appointed his only daughter, Enheduanna, as high priestess in the empire’s most important temple.
Female royalty traditionally served religious roles, and she was educated to read and write in both Sumerian and Akkadian, and make mathematical calculations.
The world's first writing started in Sumer as a system of accounting, allowing merchants to communicate over long distances with traders abroad.
Their pictogram system of record keeping developed into a script about 300 years before Enheduanna’s birth.
This early writing style, called cuneiform, was written with a reed stylus pressed into soft clay to make wedge-shaped marks.
But until Enheduanna, this writing mostly took the form of record keeping and transcription, rather than original works attributable to individual writers.
Enheduanna’s Ur was a city of 34,000 people with narrow streets, multi-storied brick homes, granaries, and irrigation.
As high priestess, Enheduanna managed grain storage for the city, oversaw hundreds of temple workers, interpreted sacred dreams, and presided over the monthly new moon festival and rituals celebrating the equinoxes.
Enheduanna set about unifying the older Sumerian culture with the newer Akkadian civilization.
To accomplish this, she wrote 42 religious hymns that combined both mythologies.
Each Mesopotamian city was ruled by a patron deity, so her hymns were dedicated to the ruling god of each major city.
She praised the city’s temple, glorified the god’s attributes, and explained the god’s relationship to other deities within the pantheon.
In her writing, she humanized the once aloof gods— now they suffered, fought, loved, and responded to human pleading.
Enheduanna’s most valuable literary contribution was the poetry she wrote to Inanna, goddess of war and desire, the divinely chaotic energy that gives spark to the universe.
Inanna delighted in all forms of sexual expression and was considered so powerful that she transcended gender boundaries, as did her earthly attendants, who could be prostitutes, eunuchs or cross-dressers.
Enheduanna placed Inanna at the top of the pantheon as the most powerful deity.
Her odes to Inanna mark the first time an author writes using the pronoun “I,” and the first time writing is used to explore deep, private emotions.
After the death of Enheduanna’s father, King Sargon, a general took advantage of the power vacuum and staged a coup.
As a powerful member of the ruling family, Enheduanna was a target, and the general exiled her from Ur.
Her nephew, the legendary Sumerian king Naram-Sin, ultimately crushed the uprising and restored his aunt as high priestess.
In total, Enheduanna served as high priestess for 40 years.
After her death, she became a minor deity, and her poetry was copied, studied, and performed throughout the empire for over 500 years.
Her poems influenced the Hebrew Old Testament, the epics of Homer, and Christian hymns.
Today, Enheduanna’s legacy still exists, on clay tablets that have stood the test of time.
If I could reveal anything that is hidden from us, at least in modern cultures, it would be to reveal something that we've forgotten, that we used to know as well as we knew our own names.
And that is that we live in a competent universe, that we are part of a brilliant planet, and that we are surrounded by genius.
Biomimicry is a new discipline that tries to learn from those geniuses, and take advice from them, design advice.
That's where I live, and it's my university as well.
I'm surrounded by genius. I cannot help but remember the organisms and the ecosystems that know how to live here gracefully on this planet.
This is what I would tell you to remember if you ever forget this again.
Remember this.
This is what happens every year.
This is what keeps its promise.
While we're doing bailouts, this is what happened.
Spring.
Imagine designing spring.
Imagine that orchestration.
You think TED is hard to organize. (Laughter) Right?
Imagine, and if you haven't done this in a while, do.
Imagine the timing, the coordination, all without top-down laws, or policies, or climate change protocols.
This happens every year.
There is lots of showing off.
There is lots of love in the air.
There's lots of grand openings.
And the organisms, I promise you, have all of their priorities in order.
I have this neighbor that keeps me in touch with this, because he's living, usually on his back, looking up at those grasses.
And one time he came up to me -- he was about seven or eight years old -- he came up to me.
And there was a wasp's nest that I had let grow in my yard, right outside my door.
And most people knock them down when they're small.
But it was fascinating to me, because I was looking at this sort of fine Italian end papers.
And he came up to me and he knocked.
He would come every day with something to show me.
And like, knock like a woodpecker on my door until I opened it up.
And he asked me how I had made the house for those wasps, because he had never seen one this big.
And I told him, "You know, Cody, the wasps actually made that."
And we looked at it together.
And I could see why he thought, you know -- it was so beautifully done.
It was so architectural. It was so precise.
But it occurred to me, how in his small life had he already believed the myth that if something was that well done, that we must have done it.
How did he not know -- it's what we've all forgotten -- that we're not the first ones to build.
We're not the first ones to process cellulose.
We're not the first ones to make paper. We're not the first ones to try to optimize packing space, or to waterproof, or to try to heat and cool a structure.
We're not the first ones to build houses for our young.
What's happening now, in this field called biomimicry, is that people are beginning to remember that organisms, other organisms, the rest of the natural world, are doing things very similar to what we need to do.
But in fact they are doing them in a way that have allowed them to live gracefully on this planet for billions of years.
So these people, biomimics, are nature's apprentices.
And they're focusing on function.
What I'd like to do is show you a few of the things that they're learning.
They have asked themselves, "What if, every time I started to invent something, I asked, 'How would nature solve this?'" And here is what they're learning.
This is an amazing picture from a Czech photographer named Jack Hedley.
This is a story about an engineer at J.R. West.
They're the people who make the bullet train.
It was called the bullet train because it was rounded in front, but every time it went into a tunnel it would build up a pressure wave, and then it would create like a sonic boom when it exited.
So the engineer's boss said, "Find a way to quiet this train."
He happened to be a birder.
He went to the equivalent of an Audubon Society meeting.
And he studied -- there was a film about king fishers.
And he thought to himself, "They go from one density of medium, the air, into another density of medium, water, without a splash. Look at this picture.
Without a splash, so they can see the fish.
And he thought, "What if we do this?"
Quieted the train.
Made it go 10 percent faster on 15 percent less electricity.
How does nature repel bacteria?
We're not the first ones to have to protect ourselves from some bacteria.
Turns out that -- this is a Galapagos Shark.
It has no bacteria on its surface, no fouling on its surface, no barnacles.
And it's not because it goes fast.
It actually basks. It's a slow-moving shark.
So how does it keep its body free of bacteria build-up?
It doesn't do it with a chemical.
It does it, it turns out, with the same denticles that you had on Speedo bathing suits, that broke all those records in the Olympics, but it's a particular kind of pattern.
And that pattern, the architecture of that pattern on its skin denticles keep bacteria from being able to land and adhere.
There is a company called Sharklet Technologies that's now putting this on the surfaces in hospitals to keep bacteria from landing, which is better than dousing it with anti-bacterials or harsh cleansers that many, many organisms are now becoming drug resistant.
Hospital-acquired infections are now killing more people every year in the United States than die from AIDS or cancer or car accidents combined -- about 100,000.
This is a little critter that's in the Namibian desert.
It has no fresh water that it's able to drink, but it drinks water out of fog.
It's got bumps on the back of its wing covers.
And those bumps act like a magnet for water.
They have water-loving tips, and waxy sides.
And the fog comes in and it builds up on the tips.
And it goes down the sides and goes into the critter's mouth.
There is actually a scientist here at Oxford who studied this, Andrew Parker.
And now kinetic and architectural firms like Grimshaw are starting to look at this as a way of coating buildings so that they gather water from the fog.
10 times better than our fog-catching nets.
CO2 as a building block.
Organisms don't think of CO2 as a poison.
Plants and organisms that make shells, coral, think of it as a building block.
There is now a cement manufacturing company starting in the United States called Calera.
They've borrowed the recipe from the coral reef, and they're using CO2 as a building block in cement, in concrete.
Instead of -- cement usually emits a ton of CO2 for every ton of cement.
Now it's reversing that equation, and actually sequestering half a ton of CO2 thanks to the recipe from the coral.
None of these are using the organisms.
They're really only using the blueprints or the recipes from the organisms.
How does nature gather the sun's energy?
This is a new kind of solar cell that's based on how a leaf works.
It's self-assembling.
It can be put down on any substrate whatsoever.
It's extremely inexpensive and rechargeable every five years.
It's actually a company a company that I'm involved in called OneSun, with Paul Hawken.
There are many many ways that nature filters water that takes salt out of water.
We take water and push it against a membrane.
And then we wonder why the membrane clogs and why it takes so much electricity.
Nature does something much more elegant.
And it's in every cell.
Every red blood cell of your body right now has these hourglass-shaped pores called aquaporins.
They actually export water molecules through.
It's kind of a forward osmosis.
They export water molecules through, and leave solutes on the other side.
A company called Aquaporin is starting to make desalination membranes mimicking this technology.
Trees and bones are constantly reforming themselves along lines of stress.
This algorithm has been put into a software program that's now being used to make bridges lightweight, to make building beams lightweight.
Actually G.M. Opel used it to create that skeleton you see, in what's called their bionic car.
It lightweighted that skeleton using a minimum amount of material, as an organism must, for the maximum amount of strength.
This beetle, unlike this chip bag here, this beetle uses one material, chitin.
And it finds many many ways to put many functions into it.
It's waterproof.
It's strong and resilient.
It's breathable. It creates color through structure.
Whereas that chip bag has about seven layers to do all of those things.
One of our major inventions that we need to be able to do to come even close to what these organisms can do is to find a way to minimize the amount of material, the kind of material we use, and to add design to it.
We use five polymers in the natural world to do everything that you see.
In our world we use about 350 polymers to make all this.
Nature is nano.
Nanotechnology, nanoparticles, you hear a lot of worry about this.
Loose nanoparticles. What is really interesting to me is that not many people have been asking, "How can we consult nature about how to make nanotechnology safe?"
Nature has been doing that for a long time.
Embedding nanoparticles in a material for instance, always.
In fact, sulfur-reducing bacteria, as part of their synthesis, they will emit, as a byproduct, nanoparticles into the water.
But then right after that, they emit a protein that actually gathers and aggregates those nanoparticles so that they fall out of solution.
Energy use. Organisms sip energy, because they have to work or barter for every single bit that they get.
And one of the largest fields right now, in the world of energy grids, you hear about the smart grid.
One of the largest consultants are the social insects.
Swarm technology. There is a company called Regen.
They are looking at how ants and bees find their food and their flowers in the most effective way as a whole hive.
And they're having appliances in your home talk to one another through that algorithm, and determine how to minimize peak power use.
There's a group of scientists in Cornell that are making what they call a synthetic tree, because they are saying, "There is no pump at the bottom of a tree."
It's capillary action and transpiration pulls water up, a drop at a time, pulling it, releasing it from a leaf and pulling it up through the roots.
And they're creating -- you can think of it as a kind of wallpaper.
They're thinking about putting it on the insides of buildings to move water up without pumps.
Amazon electric eel -- incredibly endangered, some of these species -- create 600 volts of electricity with the chemicals that are in your body.
Even more interesting to me is that 600 volts doesn't fry it.
You know we use PVC, and we sheath wires with PVC for insulation.
These organisms, how are they insulating against their own electric charge?
These are some questions that we've yet to ask.
Here's a wind turbine manufacturer that went to a whale.
Humpback whale has scalloped edges on its flippers.
And those scalloped edges play with flow in such a way that is reduces drag by 32 percent.
These wind turbines can rotate in incredibly slow windspeeds, as a result.
MIT just has a new radio chip that uses far less power than our chips.
And it's based on the cochlear of your ear, able to pick up internet, wireless, television signals and radio signals, in the same chip.
Finally, on an ecosystem scale.
At Biomimicry Guild, which is my consulting company, we work with HOK Architects.
We're looking at building whole cities in their planning department.
And what we're saying is that, shouldn't our cities do at least as well, in terms of ecosystem services, as the native systems that they replace?
So we're creating something called Ecological Performance Standards that hold cities to this higher bar.
The question is -- biomimicry is an incredibly powerful way to innovate.
The question I would ask is, "What's worth solving?"
If you haven't seen this, it's pretty amazing.
Dr. Adam Neiman.
This is a depiction of all of the water on Earth in relation to the volume of the Earth -- all the ice, all the fresh water, all the sea water -- and all the atmosphere that we can breathe, in relation to the volume of the Earth.
And inside those balls life, over 3.8 billion years, has made a lush, livable place for us.
And we are in a long, long line of organisms to come to this planet and ask ourselves, "How can we live here gracefully over the long haul?"
How can we do what life has learned to do?
Which is to create conditions conducive to life.
Now in order to do this, the design challenge of our century, I think, we need a way to remind ourselves of those geniuses, and to somehow meet them again.
One of the big ideas, one of the big projects I've been honored to work on is a new website. And I would encourage you all to please go to it.
It's called AskNature.org.
And what we're trying to do, in a TEDesque way, is to organize all biological information by design and engineering function.
And we're working with EOL, Encyclopedia of Life, Ed Wilson's TED wish.
And he's gathering all biological information on one website.
And the scientists who are contributing to EOL are answering a question, "What can we learn from this organism?"
And that information will go into AskNature.org.
And hopefully, any inventor, anywhere in the world, will be able, in the moment of creation, to type in, "How does nature remove salt from water?"
And up will come mangroves, and sea turtles and your own kidneys.
And we'll begin to be able to do as Cody does, and actually be in touch with these incredible models, these elders that have been here far, far longer than we have.
And hopefully, with their help, we'll learn how to live on this Earth, and on this home that is ours, but not ours alone.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I just want to say my name is Emmanuel Jal.
And I come from a long way.
I've been telling a story that has been so painful for me.
It's been a tough journey for me, traveling the world, telling my story in form of a book.
And also telling it like now.
And also, the easiest one was when I was doing it in form of a music.
So I have branded myself as a war child.
I'm doing this because of an old lady in my village now, who have lost her children.
There is no newspaper to cover her pain, and what she wants to change in this society.
And I'm doing it for a young man who want to create a change and has no way to project his voice because he can't write.
Or there is no Internet, like Facebook, MySpace, YouTube, for them to talk.
Also one thing that kept me pushing this story, this painful stories out, the dreams I have, sometimes, is like the voices of the dead, that I have seen would tell me, "Don't give up. Keep on going."
Because sometime I feel like stopping and not doing it, because I didn't know what I was putting myself into.
Well I was born in the most difficult time, when my country was at war.
I saw my village burned down.
The world that meant a lot to me, I saw it vanish in my face.
I saw my aunt in rape when I was only five.
My mother was claimed by the war.
My brothers and sisters were scattered.
And up to now, me and my father were detached and I still have issues with him.
Seeing people die every day, my mother crying, it's like I was raised in a violence.
And that made me call myself a war child.
And not only that, when I was eight I became a child soldier.
I didn't know what was the war for.
But one thing I knew was an image that I saw that stuck in my head.
When I went to the training camp I say, "I want to kill as many Muslims, and as many Arabs, as possible."
The training wasn't easy, but that was the driving force, because I wanted to revenge for my family.
I wanted to revenge for my village.
Luckily now things have changed because I came to discover the truth.
What was actually killing us wasn't the Muslims, wasn't the Arabs.
It was somebody sitting somewhere manipulating the system, and using religion to get what they want to get out of us, which is the oil, the diamond, the gold and the land.
So realizing the truth gave me a position to choose: should I continue to hate, or let it go?
So I happened to forgive. Now I sing music with the Muslims. I dance with them.
I even had a movie out called "War Child," funded by Muslim people.
So that pain has gone out.
But my story is huge.
So I'm just going to go into a different step now, which is easier for me.
I'm going to give you poem called "Forced to Sin," which is from my album "War Child."
I talk about my story.
One of the journey that I tread when I was tempted to eat my friend because we had no food and we were like around 400.
And only 16 people survived that journey.
So I hope you're going to hear this.
My dreams are like torment.
My every moment.
Voices in my brain, of friends that was slain.
Friends like Lual who died by my side, of starvation.
In the burning jungle, and the desert plain.
Next was I, but Jesus heard my cry.
As I was tempted to eat the rotten flesh of my comrade, he gave me comfort.
We used to raid villages, stealing chickens, goats and sheeps, anything we could eat.
I knew it was rude, but we needed food.
And therefore I was forced to sin, forced to sin to make a living, forced to sin to make a living.
Sometimes you gotta lose to win.
Never give up. Never give in.
Left home at the age of seven.
One year later, live with an AK-47 by my side.
Slept with one eye open wide.
Run, duck, play dead and hide.
I've seen my people die like flies.
But I've never seen a dead body, at least one that I've killed.
But still as I wonder, I won't go under.
Guns barking like lightning and thunder.
As a child so young and tender, Words I can't forget I still remember.
I saw sergeant command raising his hand, no retreat, no surrender.
I carry the banner of the trauma.
War child, child without a mama, still fighting in the saga.
Yet as I wage this new war I'm not alone in this drama.
No sit or stop, as I reach for the top I'm fully dedicated like a patriotic cop.
I'm on a fight, day and night.
Sometime I do wrong in order to make things right.
It's like I'm living a dream.
First time I'm feeling like a human being.
Ah! The children of Darfur.
Your empty bellies on the telly and now it's you that I'm fighting for.
Left home.
Don't even know the day I'll ever return.
My country is war-torn.
Music I used to hear was bombs and fire of guns.
So many people die that I don't even cry no more.
Ask God question, what am I here for.
And why are my people poor.
And why, why when the rest of the children were learning how to read and write, I was learning how to fight.
I ate snails, vultures, rabbits, snakes, and anything that had life.
I was ready to eat.
I know it's a shame. But who is to be blamed?
That's my story shared in the form of a lesson.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) What energized me and kept me going is the music I do.
I never saw anybody to tell my story to them so they could advise me or do therapy.
So the music had been my therapy for me.
It's been where I actually see heaven, where I can be happy, where I can be a child again, in dances, through music.
So one thing I know about music: music is the only thing that has power to enter your cell system, your mind, your heart, influence your soul and your spirit, and can even influence the way you live without even you knowing.
Music is the only thing that can make you want to wake up your bed and shake your leg, without even wanting to do it.
And so the power music has I normally compare to the power love when love doesn't see a color.
You know, if you fall in love with a frog, that's it.
One testimony about how I find music is powerful is when I was still a soldier back then.
I hated the people in the north.
But I don't know why I don't hate their music.
So we party and dance to their music.
And one thing that shocked me is one day they brought an Arab musician to come and entertain the soldiers.
And I almost broke my leg dancing to his music.
But I had this question.
So now I'm doing music so I know what the power of music is.
So what's happening here?
I've been in a painful journey.
Today is day number 233 in which I only eat dinner.
I don't eat breakfast. No lunch.
And I've done a campaign called Lose to Win.
Where I'm losing so that I could win the battle that I'm fighting now.
So my breakfast, my lunch, I donate it to a charity that I founded because we want to build a school in Sudan.
And I'm doing this because also it's a normal thing in my home, people eat one meal a day.
Here I am in the West. I choose not to.
So in my village now, kids there, they normally listen to BBC, or any radio, and they are waiting to know, the day Emmanuel will eat his breakfast it means he got the money to build our school.
And so I made a commitment. I say, "I'm gonna not eat my breakfast."
I thought I was famous enough that I would raise the money within one month, but I've been humbled.
(Laughter) So it's taken me 232 days.
And I said, "No stop until we get it."
And like it's been done on Facebook, MySpace.
The people are giving three dollars.
The lowest amount we ever got was 20 cents.
Somebody donated 20 cents online.
I don't know how they did it.
(Laughter) But that moved me.
And so, the importance of education to me is what I'm willing to die for.
I'm willing to die for this, because I know what it can do to my people.
Education enlighten your brain, give you so many chances, and you're able to survive.
As a nation we have been crippled.
For so many years we have fed on aid.
You see a 20-years-old, 30-years-old families in a refugee camps.
They only get the food that drops from the sky, from the U.N.
So these people, you're killing a whole generation if you just give them aid.
If anybody want to help us this is what we need.
Give us tools. Give the farmers tools.
It's rain. Africa is fertile. They can grow the crops.
(Applause) Invest in education.
Education so that we have strong institution that can create a revolution to change everything.
Because we have all those old men that are creating wars in Africa. They will die soon.
But if you invest in education then we'll be able to change Africa.
That's what I'm asking.
(Applause) So in order to do that, I founded a charter called Gua Africa, where we put kids in school.
And now we have a couple in university.
We have like 40 kids, ex-child soldiers mixed with anybody that we feel like we want to support.
And I said "I'm going to put it in practice."
And with the people that are going to follow me and help me do things.
That's what I want to do to change, to make a difference in the world.
Well now, my time is going, so I want to sing a song.
But I'll ask you guys to stand up so we celebrate the life of a British aid worker called Emma McCune that made it possible for me to be here.
I'm gonna sing this song, just to inspire you how this woman has made a difference.
She came to my country and saw the importance of education.
She said the only way to help Sudan is to invest in the women, educating them, educating the children, so that they could come and create a revolution in this complex society.
So she even ended up marrying a commander from the SPLA.
And she rescued over 150 child soldiers.
One of them happened to be me now.
And so at this moment I want to ask to celebrate Emma with me.
Are you guys ready to celebrate Emma?
Audience: Yes!
Emmanuel Jal: All right.
♫ This one goes to Emma McCune ♫ ♫ Angel to rescue came one afternoon ♫ ♫ I'm here because you rescued me ♫ ♫ I'm proud to carry your legacy ♫ ♫ Thank you. Bless you. R.I.P. ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ Another starving refugee ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? Yeah! ♫ ♫ Yeah! Yeah! ♫ ♫ You would have seen my face on the telly ♫ ♫ Fat hungry belly ♫ ♫ Flies in my eyes, head too big for my size ♫ ♫ Just another little starving child ♫ ♫ Running around in Africa, born to be wild ♫ ♫ Praise God, praise the Almighty ♫ ♫ for sending an angel to rescue me ♫ ♫ I got a reason for being on this Earth ♫ ♫ 'Cause I know more than many what a life is worth ♫ ♫ Now that I got a chance to stand my ground ♫ ♫ I'm gonna run over mountains, leaps and bounds ♫ ♫ I ain't an angel, hope I'll be one soon ♫ ♫ And if I am, I wanna be like Emma McCune ♫ ♫ Me! What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ Another starving refugee ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? Yeah! Yeah!♫ ♫ Yeah, Yeah! ♫ ♫ I would have probably died from starvation ♫ ♫ Or some other wretched disease ♫ ♫ I would have grown up with no education ♫ ♫ Just another refugee ♫ ♫ I stand here because somebody cared ♫ ♫ I stand here because somebody dared ♫ ♫ I know there is a lot of Emmas out there ♫ ♫ Who is willing and trying to save a life of a child ♫ ♫ What would I be? Me! ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ Another starving refugee ♫ ♫ I remember the time when I was small ♫ ♫ When I couldn't read or write at all ♫ ♫ Now I'm all grown up, I got my education ♫ ♫ The sky is the limit and I can't be stopped by no one ♫ ♫ How I prayed for this day to come ♫ ♫ And I pray that the world find wisdom ♫ ♫ To give the poor in need some assistance ♫ ♫ Instead of putting up resistance, yeah ♫ ♫ Sitting and waiting for the politics to fix this ♫ ♫ It ain't gonna happen ♫ ♫ They're all sitting on they asses ♫ ♫ Popping champagne and sponging off the masses ♫ ♫ Coming from a refugee boy-soldier ♫ ♫ But I still got my dignity ♫ ♫ I gotta say it again ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me ♫ ♫ I'd be a corpse on the African plain ♫ Is there anybody who's here in the back, some love.
Big scream for Emma everybody.
Yeah! I'm gonna get crazy now.
♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ Another starving refugee ♫ ♫ What would I be? ♫ ♫ If Emma never rescued me? ♫ ♫ Yeah, Yeah ♫ ♫ Yeah, I would have probably died from starvation ♫ ♫ Or some other wretched disease ♫ ♫ I would have grown up with no education ♫ ♫ Just another refugee ♫ (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Go save a life of a child.
(Applause)
I need to make a confession at the outset here.
A little over 20 years ago, I did something that I regret, something that I'm not particularly proud of.
Something that, in many ways, I wish no one would ever know, but here I feel kind of obliged to reveal.
(Laughter) In the late 1980s, in a moment of youthful indiscretion, I went to law school.
(Laughter) In America, law is a professional degree: after your university degree, you go on to law school.
When I got to law school, I didn't do very well.
To put it mildly, I didn't do very well.
I, in fact, graduated in the part of my law school class that made the top 90% possible.
(Laughter) Thank you.
I never practiced law a day in my life; I pretty much wasn't allowed to.
(Laughter) But today, against my better judgment, against the advice of my own wife, I want to try to dust off some of those legal skills -- what's left of those legal skills.
I don't want to tell you a story.
I want to make a case.
I want to make a hard-headed, evidence-based, dare I say lawyerly case, for rethinking how we run our businesses.
So, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, take a look at this.
This is called the candle problem.
Some of you might know it.
It's created in 1945 by a psychologist named Karl Duncker.
He created this experiment that is used in many other experiments in behavioral science.
And here's how it works. Suppose I'm the experimenter.
I bring you into a room.
I give you a candle, some thumbtacks and some matches.
And I say to you, "Your job is to attach the candle to the wall so the wax doesn't drip onto the table."
Now what would you do?
Many people begin trying to thumbtack the candle to the wall.
Doesn't work.
I saw somebody kind of make the motion over here -- some people have a great idea where they light the match, melt the side of the candle, try to adhere it to the wall.
It's an awesome idea. Doesn't work.
And eventually, after five or ten minutes, most people figure out the solution, which you can see here.
The key is to overcome what's called functional fixedness.
You look at that box and you see it only as a receptacle for the tacks.
But it can also have this other function, as a platform for the candle.
I want to tell you about an experiment using the candle problem, done by a scientist named Sam Glucksberg, who is now at Princeton University, US, This shows the power of incentives.
He gathered his participants and said: "I'm going to time you, how quickly you can solve this problem."
To one group he said, "I'm going to time you to establish norms, averages for how long it typically takes someone to solve this sort of problem."
To the second group he offered rewards.
He said, "If you're in the top 25% of the fastest times, you get five dollars.
If you're the fastest of everyone we're testing here today, you get 20 dollars."
Now this is several years ago, adjusted for inflation, it's a decent sum of money for a few minutes of work.
It's a nice motivator.
Question: How much faster did this group solve the problem?
Answer: It took them, on average, three and a half minutes longer.
3.5 min longer.
I mean, I'm an American. I believe in free markets.
That's not how it's supposed to work, right?
(Laughter) If you want people to perform better, you reward them. Right?
Bonuses, commissions, their own reality show.
Incentivize them.
But that's not happening here.
You've got an incentive designed to sharpen thinking and accelerate creativity, and it does just the opposite.
It dulls thinking and blocks creativity.
What's interesting about this experiment is that it's not an aberration.
This has been replicated over and over again for nearly 40 years.
These contingent motivators -- if you do this, then you get that -- work in some circumstances.
But for a lot of tasks, they actually either don't work or, often, they do harm.
This is one of the most robust findings in social science, and also one of the most ignored.
I spent the last couple of years looking at the science of human motivation, particularly the dynamics of extrinsic motivators and intrinsic motivators.
And I'm telling you, it's not even close.
If you look at the science, there is a mismatch between what science knows and what business does.
What's alarming here is that our business operating system -- think of the set of assumptions and protocols beneath our businesses, how we motivate people, how we apply our human resources-- it's built entirely around these extrinsic motivators, around carrots and sticks.
That's actually fine for many kinds of 20th century tasks.
But for 21st century tasks, that mechanistic, reward-and-punishment approach doesn't work, often doesn't work, and often does harm.
Let me show you.
Glucksberg did another similar experiment, he presented the problem in a slightly different way, like this up here.
Attach the candle to the wall so the wax doesn't drip onto the table.
Same deal. You: we're timing for norms.
You: we're incentivizing.
What happened this time?
This time, the incentivized group kicked the other group's butt.
Why?
Because when the tacks are out of the box, it's pretty easy isn't it?
(Laughter) If-then rewards work really well for those sorts of tasks, where there is a simple set of rules and a clear destination to go to.
Rewards, by their very nature, narrow our focus, concentrate the mind; that's why they work in so many cases.
So, for tasks like this, a narrow focus, where you just see the goal right there, zoom straight ahead to it, they work really well.
But for the real candle problem, you don't want to be looking like this.
The solution is on the periphery. You want to be looking around.
That reward actually narrows our focus and restricts our possibility.
Let me tell you why this is so important.
In western Europe, in many parts of Asia, in North America, in Australia, white-collar workers are doing less of this kind of work, and more of this kind of work.
That routine, rule-based, left-brain work -- certain kinds of accounting, financial analysis, computer programming -- has become fairly easy to outsource, fairly easy to automate.
Software can do it faster.
Low-cost providers can do it cheaper.
So what really matters are the more right-brained creative, conceptual kinds of abilities.
Think about your own work.
Think about your own work.
Are the problems that you face, or even the problems we've been talking about here, do they have a clear set of rules, and a single solution?
No. The rules are mystifying.
The solution, if it exists at all, is surprising and not obvious.
Everybody in this room is dealing with their own version of the candle problem.
And for candle problems of any kind, in any field, those if-then rewards, the things around which we've built so many of our businesses, don't work!
It makes me crazy.
And here's the thing.
This is not a feeling.
Okay? I'm a lawyer; I don't believe in feelings.
This is not a philosophy.
I'm an American; I don't believe in philosophy.
(Laughter) This is a fact -- or, as we say in my hometown of Washington, D.C., a true fact.
(Laughter) (Applause) Let me give you an example.
Let me marshal the evidence here.
I'm not telling a story, I'm making a case.
Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, some evidence: Dan Ariely, one of the great economists of our time, he and three colleagues did a study of some MIT students.
They gave these MIT students a bunch of games, games that involved creativity, and motor skills, and concentration.
And the offered them, for performance, three levels of rewards: small reward, medium reward, large reward.
If you do really well you get the large reward, on down.
What happened?
As long as the task involved only mechanical skill bonuses worked as they would be expected: the higher the pay, the better the performance.
But once the task called for even rudimentary cognitive skill, a larger reward led to poorer performance.
Then they said, "Let's see if there's any cultural bias here.
Let's go to Madurai, India and test it."
Standard of living is lower.
In Madurai, a reward that is modest in North American standards, is more meaningful there.
Same deal. A bunch of games, three levels of rewards.
What happens?
People offered the medium level of rewards did no better than people offered the small rewards.
But this time, people offered the highest rewards, they did the worst of all.
In eight of the nine tasks we examined across three experiments, higher incentives led to worse performance.
Is this some kind of touchy-feely socialist conspiracy going on here?
No, these are economists from MIT, from Carnegie Mellon, from the University of Chicago.
Do you know who sponsored this research?
The Federal Reserve Bank of the United States.
That's the American experience.
Let's go across the pond to the London School of Economics, LSE, London School of Economics, alma mater of eleven Nobel Laureates in economics.
Training ground for great economic thinkers like George Soros, and Friedrich Hayek, and Mick Jagger.
(Laughter) Last month, just last month, economists at LSE looked at 51 studies of pay-for-performance plans, inside of companies.
Here's what they said: "We find that financial incentives can result in a negative impact on overall performance."
There is a mismatch between what science knows and what business does.
And what worries me, as we stand here in the rubble of the economic collapse, is that too many organizations are making their decisions, their policies about talent and people, based on assumptions that are outdated, unexamined, and rooted more in folklore than in science.
And if we really want to get out of this economic mess, if we really want high performance on those definitional tasks of the 21st century, the solution is not to do more of the wrong things, to entice people with a sweeter carrot, or threaten them with a sharper stick.
We need a whole new approach.
The good news is that the scientists who've been studying motivation have given us this new approach.
It's built much more around intrinsic motivation.
Around the desire to do things because they matter, because we like it, they're interesting, or part of something important.
And to my mind, that new operating system for our businesses revolves around three elements: autonomy, mastery and purpose.
Autonomy: the urge to direct our own lives.
Mastery: the desire to get better and better at something that matters.
Purpose: the yearning to do what we do in the service of something larger than ourselves.
These are the building blocks of an entirely new operating system for our businesses.
I want to talk today only about autonomy.
In the 20th century, we came up with this idea of management.
Management did not emanate from nature.
Management is not a tree, it's a television set.
Somebody invented it.
It doesn't mean it's going to work forever.
Management is great.
Traditional notions of management are great if you want compliance.
But if you want engagement, self-direction works better.
Some examples of some kind of radical notions of self-direction.
You don't see a lot of it, but you see the first stirrings of something really interesting going on, what it means is paying people adequately and fairly, absolutely -- getting the issue of money off the table, and then giving people lots of autonomy.
Some examples.
How many of you have heard of the company Atlassian?
It looks like less than half.
(Laughter) Atlassian is an Australian software company.
And they do something incredibly cool.
A few times a year they tell their engineers, "Go for the next 24 hours and work on anything you want, as long as it's not part of your regular job.
Work on anything you want."
Engineers use this time to come up with a cool patch for code, come up with an elegant hack.
Then they present all of the stuff that they've developed to their teammates, to the rest of the company, in this wild and woolly all-hands meeting at the end of the day.
Being Australians, everybody has a beer.
They call them FedEx Days.
Why?
It's pretty; not bad.
It's a huge trademark violation, but it's pretty clever.
(Laughter) That one day of intense autonomy has produced a whole array of software fixes that might never have existed.
It's worked so well that Atlassian has taken it to the next level with 20% time -- done, famously, at Google -- where engineers can spend 20% of their time working on anything they want.
They have autonomy over their time, their task, their team, their technique.
Radical amounts of autonomy.
And at Google, as many of you know, about half of the new products in a typical year are birthed during that 20% time: things like Gmail, Orkut, Google News.
Let me give you an even more radical example of it: something called the Results Only Work Environment (the ROWE), created by two American consultants, in place at a dozen companies around North America.
In a ROWE people don't have schedules.
They show up when they want.
They don't have to be in the office at a certain time, or any time.
They just have to get their work done.
How they do it, when they do it, where they do it, is totally up to them.
Meetings in these kinds of environments are optional.
What happens?
Almost across the board, productivity goes up, worker engagement goes up, worker satisfaction goes up, turnover goes down.
Autonomy, mastery and purpose, the building blocks of a new way of doing things.
Some of you might look at this and say, "Hmm, that sounds nice, but it's Utopian."
And I say, "Nope.
The mid-1990s, Microsoft started an encyclopedia called Encarta.
They had deployed all the right incentives, They paid professionals to write and edit thousands of articles.
Well-compensated managers oversaw the whole thing to make sure it came in on budget and on time.
A few years later, another encyclopedia got started.
Different model, right?
Do it for fun.
Do it because you like to do it.
Just 10 years ago, if you had gone to an economist, anywhere, "Hey, I've got these two different models for creating an encyclopedia.
If they went head to head, who would win?"
10 years ago you could not have found a single sober economist anywhere on planet Earth who would have predicted the Wikipedia model.
This is the titanic battle between these two approaches.
This is the Ali-Frazier of motivation, right?
This is the Thrilla in Manila.
Intrinsic motivators versus extrinsic motivators.
Autonomy, mastery and purpose, versus carrot and sticks, and who wins?
Intrinsic motivation, autonomy, mastery and purpose, in a knockout.
Let me wrap up.
There is a mismatch between what science knows and what business does.
Here is what science knows.
One: Those 20th century rewards, those motivators we think are a natural part of business, do work, but only in a surprisingly narrow band of circumstances.
Two: Those if-then rewards often destroy creativity.
Three: The secret to high performance isn't rewards and punishments, but that unseen intrinsic drive-- the drive to do things for their own sake.
The drive to do things cause they matter.
And here's the best part.
We already know this.
So, if we repair this mismatch between science and business, if we bring our motivation, notions of motivation into the 21st century, if we get past this lazy, dangerous, ideology of carrots and sticks, we can strengthen our businesses, we can solve a lot of those candle problems, and maybe, maybe -- we can change the world.
I rest my case.
(Applause)
Early visions of wireless power actually were thought of by Nikola Tesla basically about 100 years ago.
The thought that you wouldn't want to transfer electric power wirelessly, no one ever thought of that.
They thought, "Who would use it if you didn't?"
And so, in fact, he actually set about doing a variety of things.
Built the Tesla coil. This tower was built on Long Island back at the beginning of the 1900s.
And the idea was, it was supposed to be able to transfer power anywhere on Earth.
We'll never know if this stuff worked. Actually, I think the Federal Bureau of Investigation took it down for security purposes, sometime in the early 1900s.
But the one thing that did come out of electricity is that we love this stuff so much.
I mean, think about how much we love this.
If you just walk outside, there are trillions of dollars that have been invested in infrastructure around the world, putting up wires to get power from where it's created to where it's used.
The other thing is, we love batteries.
And for those of us that have an environmental element to us, there is something like 40 billion disposable batteries built every year for power that, generally speaking, is used within a few inches or a few feet of where there is very inexpensive power.
So, before I got here, I thought, "You know, I am from North America.
We do have a little bit of a reputation in the United States."
So I thought I'd better look it up first.
So definition number six is the North American definition of the word "suck."
Wires suck, they really do.
Think about it. Whether that's you in that picture or something under your desk.
The other thing is, batteries suck too.
And they really, really do.
Do you ever wonder what happens to this stuff?
40 billion of these things built.
This is what happens.
They fall apart, they disintegrate, and they end up here.
So when you talk about expensive power, the cost per kilowatt-hour to supply battery power to something is on the order of two to three hundred pounds.
Think about that.
The most expensive grid power in the world is thousandths of that.
So fortunately, one of the other definitions of "suck" that was in there, it does create a vacuum.
And nature really does abhor a vacuum.
What happened back a few years ago was a group of theoretical physicists at MIT actually came up with this concept of transferring power over distance.
Basically they were able to light a 60 watt light bulb at a distance of about two meters.
It got about 50 percent of the efficiency -- by the way, that's still a couple thousand times more efficient than a battery would be, to do the same thing.
But were able to light that, and do it very successfully.
This was actually the experiment. So you can see the coils were somewhat larger.
The light bulb was a fairly simple task, from their standpoint.
This all came from a professor waking up at night to the third night in a row that his wife's cellphone was beeping because it was running out of battery power.
And he was thinking, "With all the electricity that's out there in the walls, why couldn't some of that just come into the phone so I could get some sleep?"
And he actually came up with this concept of resonant energy transfer.
But inside a standard transformer are two coils of wire.
And those two coils of wire are really, really close to each other, and actually do transfer power magnetically and wirelessly, only over a very short distance.
What Dr. Soljacic figured out how to do was separate the coils in a transformer to a greater distance than the size of those transformers using this technology, which is not dissimilar from the way an opera singer shatters a glass on the other side of the room.
It's a resonant phenomenon for which he actually received a MacArthur Fellowship Award, which is nicknamed the Genius Award, last September, for his discovery.
So how does it work?
Imagine a coil. For those of you that are engineers, there's a capacitor attached to it too.
And if you can cause that coil to resonate, what will happen is it will pulse at alternating current frequencies -- at a fairly high frequency, by the way.
And if you can bring another device close enough to the source, that will only work at exactly that frequency, you can actually get them to do what's called strongly couple, and transfer magnetic energy between them.
And then what you do is, you start out with electricity, turn it into magnetic field, take that magnetic field, turn it back into electricity, and then you can use it.
Number one question I get asked.
I mean, people are worried about cellphones being safe.
You know. What about safety?
The first thing is this is not a "radiative" technology.
It doesn't radiate.
There aren't electric fields here. It's a magnetic field.
It stays within either what we call the source, or within the device.
And actually, the magnetic fields we're using are basically about the same as the Earth's magnetic field.
We live in a magnetic field.
And the other thing that's pretty cool about the technology is that it only transfers energy to things that work at exactly the same frequency.
And it's virtually impossible in nature to make that happen.
Then finally we have governmental bodies everywhere that will regulate everything we do.
They've pretty much set field exposure limits, which all of the things in the stuff I'll show you today sort of sit underneath those guidelines.
Mobile electronics.
Home electronics.
Those cords under your desk, I bet everybody here has something that looks like that or those batteries.
There are industrial applications.
And then finally, electric vehicles.
These electric cars are beautiful.
But who is going to want to plug them in?
Imagine driving into your garage -- we've built a system to do this -- you drive into your garage, and the car charges itself, because there is a mat on the floor that's plugged into the wall.
And it actually causes your car to charge safely and efficiently.
Then there's all kinds of other applications. Implanted medical devices, where people don't have to die of infections anymore if you can seal the thing up.
Credit cards, robot vacuum cleaners.
So what I'd like to do is take a couple minutes and show you, actually, how it works.
And what I'm going to do is to show you pretty much what's here.
You've got a coil.
That coil is connected to an R.F. amplifier that creates a high-frequency oscillating magnetic field.
We put one on the back of the television set.
By the way, I do make it look a little bit easier than it is.
There's lots of electronics and secret sauce and all kinds of intellectual property that go into it.
But then what's going to happen is, it will create a field.
It will cause one to get created on the other side.
And if the demo gods are willing, in about 10 seconds or so we should see it.
The 10 seconds actually are because we -- I don't know if any of you have ever thought about plugging a T.V. in when you use just a cord.
Generally, you have to go over and hit the button. So I thought we put a little computer in it that has to wake up to tell it to do that.
So, I'll plug that in.
It creates a magnetic field here.
It causes one to be created out here.
And as I said, in sort of about 10 seconds we should start to see ...
This is a commercially -- (Applause) available color television set.
Imagine, you get one of these things. You want to hang them on the wall.
How many people want to hang them on the wall?
Think about it. You don't want those ugly cords coming down.
Imagine if you can get rid of it.
The other thing I wanted to talk about was safety.
So, there is nothing going on. I'm okay.
And I'll do it again, just for safety's sake.
Almost immediately, though, people ask, "How small can you make this? Can you make this small enough?"
Because remember Dr. Soljacic's original idea was his wife's cellphone beeping.
So, I wanted to show you something.
We're an equal opportunity designer of this sort of thing.
This a Google G1.
You know, it's the latest thing that's come out.
It runs the Android operating system.
I think I heard somebody talk about that before.
It's odd. It has a battery.
It also has coiled electronics that WiTricity has put into the back of it.
And if I can get the camera -- okay, great -- you'll see, as I get sort of close...
you're looking at a cellphone powered completely wirelessly.
(Applause) And I know some of you are Apple aficionados.
So, you know they don't make it easy at Apple to get inside their phones.
So we put a little sleeve on the back, but we should be able to get this guy to wake up too.
And those of you that have an iPhone recognize the green center.
(Applause) And Nokia as well.
You'll see that what we did there is put a little thing in the back, to do that, and it probably beeps, actually, as it goes on as well.
But they typically use it to light up the screen.
So, imagine these things could go ... they could go in your ceiling.
They could go in the floor. They could go, actually, underneath your desktop.
So that when you walk in or you come in from home, if you carry a purse, it works in your purse.
You never have to worry about plugging these things in again.
And think of what that would do for you.
So I think in closing, sort of in the immortal visions of The New Yorker magazine, I thought I'd put up one more slide.
And for those of you who can't read it, it says, "It does appear to be some kind of wireless technology."
So, thank you very much.
(Applause)
What I'd like to talk about is really the biggest problems in the world.
I'm not going to talk about "The Skeptical Environmentalist" -- probably that's also a good choice.
(Laughter) But I am going talk about: what are the big problems in the world?
And I must say, before I go on, I should ask every one of you to try and get out pen and paper because I'm actually going to ask you to help me to look at how we do that.
So get out your pen and paper.
Bottom line is, there is a lot of problems out there in the world.
I'm just going to list some of them.
There are 800 million people starving.
There's a billion people without clean drinking water.
Two billion people without sanitation.
There are several million people dying of HIV and AIDS.
The lists go on and on.
There's two billions of people who will be severely affected by climate change -- so on.
There are many, many problems out there.
In an ideal world, we would solve them all, but we don't.
We don't actually solve all problems.
And if we do not, the question I think we need to ask ourselves -- and that's why it's on the economy session -- is to say, if we don't do all things, we really have to start asking ourselves, which ones should we solve first?
And that's the question I'd like to ask you.
If we had say, 50 billion dollars over the next four years to spend to do good in this world, where should we spend it?
We identified 10 of the biggest challenges in the world, and I will just briefly read them: climate change, communicable diseases, conflicts, education, financial instability, governance and corruption, malnutrition and hunger, population migration, sanitation and water, and subsidies and trade barriers.
We believe that these in many ways encompass the biggest problems in the world.
The obvious question would be to ask, what do you think are the biggest things?
Where should we start on solving these problems?
But that's a wrong problem to ask.
That was actually the problem that was asked in Davos in January.
But of course, there's a problem in asking people to focus on problems.
Because we can't solve problems.
Surely the biggest problem we have in the world is that we all die.
But we don't have a technology to solve that, right?
So the point is not to prioritize problems, but the point is to prioritize solutions to problems.
And that would be -- of course that gets a little more complicated.
To climate change that would be like Kyoto.
To communicable diseases, it might be health clinics or mosquito nets.
To conflicts, it would be U.N.'s peacekeeping forces, and so on.
The point that I would like to ask you to try to do, is just in 30 seconds -- and I know this is in a sense an impossible task -- write down what you think is probably some of the top priorities.
And also -- and that's, of course, where economics gets evil -- to put down what are the things we should not do, first.
What should be at the bottom of the list?
Please, just take 30 seconds, perhaps talk to your neighbor, and just figure out what should be the top priorities and the bottom priorities of the solutions that we have to the world's biggest issues.
The amazing part of this process -- and of course, I mean, I would love to -- I only have 18 minutes, I've already given you quite a substantial amount of my time, right?
I'd love to go into, and get you to think about this process, and that's actually what we did.
And I also strongly encourage you, and I'm sure we'll also have these discussions afterwards, to think about, how do we actually prioritize?
Of course, you have to ask yourself, why on Earth was such a list never done before?
And one reason is that prioritization is incredibly uncomfortable.
Nobody wants to do this.
Of course, every organization would love to be on the top of such a list.
But every organization would also hate to be not on the top of the list.
And since there are many more not-number-one spots on the list than there is number ones, it makes perfect sense not to want to do such a list.
We've had the U.N. for almost 60 years, yet we've never actually made a fundamental list of all the big things that we can do in the world, and said, which of them should we do first?
So it doesn't mean that we are not prioritizing -- any decision is a prioritization, so of course we are still prioritizing, if only implicitly -- and that's unlikely to be as good as if we actually did the prioritization, and went in and talked about it.
So what I'm proposing is really to say that we have, for a very long time, had a situation when we've had a menu of choices.
There are many, many things we can do out there, but we've not had the prices, nor the sizes.
We have not had an idea.
Imagine going into a restaurant and getting this big menu card, but you have no idea what the price is.
You know, you have a pizza; you've no idea what the price is.
It could be at one dollar; it could be 1,000 dollars.
It could be a family-size pizza; it could be a very individual-size pizza, right?
We'd like to know these things.
And that is what the Copenhagen Consensus is really trying to do -- to try to put prices on these issues.
And so basically, this has been the Copenhagen Consensus' process.
We got 30 of the world's best economists, three in each area.
So we have three of world's top economists write about climate change.
What can we do? What will be the cost and what will be the benefit of that?
Likewise in communicable diseases.
Three of the world's top experts saying, what can we do?
What would be the price?
What should we do about it, and what will be the outcome?
And so on.
Then we had some of the world's top economists, eight of the world's top economists, including three Nobel Laureates, meet in Copenhagen in May 2004.
We called them the "dream team."
The Cambridge University prefects decided to call them the Real Madrid of economics.
That works very well in Europe, but it doesn't really work over here.
And what they basically did was come out with a prioritized list.
And then you ask, why economists?
And of course, I'm very happy you asked that question -- (Laughter) -- because that's a very good question.
The point is, of course, if you want to know about malaria, you ask a malaria expert.
If you want to know about climate, you ask a climatologist.
But if you want to know which of the two you should deal with first, you can't ask either of them, because that's not what they do.
That is what economists do.
They prioritize.
They make that in some ways disgusting task of saying, which one should we do first, and which one should we do afterwards?
So this is the list, and this is the one I'd like to share with you.
Of course, you can also see it on the website, and we'll also talk about it more, I'm sure, as the day goes on.
They basically came up with a list where they said there were bad projects -- basically, projects where if you invest a dollar, you get less than a dollar back.
Then there's fair projects, good projects and very good projects.
And of course, it's the very good projects we should start doing.
I'm going to go from backwards so that we end up with the best projects.
These were the bad projects.
As you might see the bottom of the list was climate change.
This offends a lot of people, and that's probably one of the things where people will say I shouldn't come back, either.
And I'd like to talk about that, because that's really curious.
Why is it it came up?
And I'll actually also try to get back to this because it's probably one of the things that we'll disagree with on the list that you wrote down.
The reason why they came up with saying that Kyoto -- or doing something more than Kyoto -- is a bad deal is simply because it's very inefficient.
It's not saying that global warming is not happening.
It's not saying that it's not a big problem.
But it's saying that what we can do about it is very little, at a very high cost.
What they basically show us, the average of all macroeconomic models, is that Kyoto, if everyone agreed, would cost about 150 billion dollars a year.
That's a substantial amount of money.
That's two to three times the global development aid that we give the Third World every year.
Yet it would do very little good.
All models show it will postpone warming for about six years in 2100.
So the guy in Bangladesh who gets a flood in 2100 can wait until 2106.
Which is a little good, but not very much good.
So the idea here really is to say, well, we've spent a lot of money doing a little good.
And just to give you a sense of reference, the U.N. actually estimate that for half that amount, for about 75 billion dollars a year, we could solve all major basic problems in the world.
We could give clean drinking water, sanitation, basic healthcare and education to every single human being on the planet.
So we have to ask ourselves, do we want to spend twice the amount on doing very little good?
Or half the amount on doing an amazing amount of good?
And that is really why it becomes a bad project.
It's not to say that if we had all the money in the world, we wouldn't want to do it.
But it's to say, when we don't, it's just simply not our first priority.
The fair projects -- notice I'm not going to comment on all these -- but communicable diseases, scale of basic health services -- just made it, simply because, yes, scale of basic health services is a great thing.
It would do a lot of good, but it's also very, very costly.
Again, what it tells us is suddenly we start thinking about both sides of the equation.
If you look at the good projects, a lot of sanitation and water projects came in.
Again, sanitation and water is incredibly important, but it also costs a lot of infrastructure.
So I'd like to show you the top four priorities which should be at least the first ones that we deal with when we talk about how we should deal with the problems in the world.
The fourth best problem is malaria -- dealing with malaria.
The incidence of malaria is about a couple of [million] people get infected every year.
It might even cost up towards a percentage point of GDP every year for affected nations.
If we invested about 13 billion dollars over the next four years, we could bring that incidence down to half.
We could avoid about 500,000 people dying, but perhaps more importantly, we could avoid about a [million] people getting infected every year.
We would significantly increase their ability to deal with many of the other problems that they have to deal with -- of course, in the long run, also to deal with global warming.
This third best one was free trade.
Basically, the model showed that if we could get free trade, and especially cut subsidies in the U.S. and Europe, we could basically enliven the global economy to an astounding number of about 2,400 billion dollars a year, half of which would accrue to the Third World.
Again, the point is to say that we could actually pull two to three hundred million people out of poverty, very radically fast, in about two to five years.
That would be the third best thing we could do.
The second best thing would be to focus on malnutrition.
Not just malnutrition in general, but there's a very cheap way of dealing with malnutrition, namely, the lack of micronutrients.
Basically, about half of the world's population is lacking in iron, zinc, iodine and vitamin A.
If we invest about 12 billion dollars, we could make a severe inroad into that problem.
That would be the second best investment that we could do.
And the very best project would be to focus on HIV/AIDS.
Basically, if we invest 27 billion dollars over the next eight years, we could avoid 28 new million cases of HIV/AIDS.
Again, what this does and what it focuses on is saying there are two very different ways that we can deal with HIV/AIDS.
One is treatment; the other one is prevention.
And again, in an ideal world, we would do both.
But in a world where we don't do either, or don't do it very well, we have to at least ask ourselves where should we invest first.
And treatment is much, much more expensive than prevention.
So basically, what this focuses on is saying, we can do a lot more by investing in prevention.
Basically for the amount of money that we spend, we can do X amount of good in treatment, and 10 times as much good in prevention.
So again, what we focus on is prevention rather than treatment, at first rate.
What this really does is that it makes us think about our priorities.
I'd like to have you look at your priority list and say, did you get it right?
Or did you get close to what we came up with here?
Well, of course, one of the things is climate change again.
I find a lot of people find it very, very unlikely that we should do that.
We should also do climate change, if for no other reason, simply because it's such a big problem.
But of course, we don't do all problems.
There are many problems out there in the world.
And what I want to make sure of is, if we actually focus on problems, that we focus on the right ones.
The ones where we can do a lot of good rather than a little good.
And I think, actually -- Thomas Schelling, one of the participants in the dream team, he put it very, very well.
One of things that people forget, is that in 100 years, when we're talking about most of the climate change impacts will be, people will be much, much richer.
Even the most pessimistic impact scenarios of the U.N.
estimate that the average person in the developing world in 2100 will be about as rich as we are today.
Much more likely, they will be two to four times richer than we are.
And of course, we'll be even richer than that.
But the point is to say, when we talk about saving people, or helping people in Bangladesh in 2100, we're not talking about a poor Bangladeshi.
We're actually talking about a fairly rich Dutch guy.
And so the real point, of course, is to say, do we want to spend a lot of money helping a little, 100 years from now, a fairly rich Dutch guy?
Or do we want to help real poor people, right now, in Bangladesh, who really need the help, and whom we can help very, very cheaply?
Or as Schelling put it, imagine if you were a rich -- as you will be -- a rich Chinese, a rich Bolivian, a rich Congolese, in 2100, thinking back on 2005, and saying, "How odd that they cared so much about helping me a little bit through climate change, and cared so fairly little about helping my grandfather and my great grandfather, whom they could have helped so much more, and who needed the help so much more?"
So I think that really does tell us why it is we need to get our priorities straight.
Even if it doesn't accord to the typical way we see this problem.
Of course, that's mainly because climate change has good pictures.
We have, you know, "The Day After Tomorrow" -- it looks great, right?
It's a good film in the sense that I certainly want to see it, right, but don't expect Emmerich to cast Brad Pitt in his next movie digging latrines in Tanzania or something. (Laughter) It just doesn't make for as much of a movie.
So in many ways, I think of the Copenhagen Consensus and the whole discussion of priorities as a defense for boring problems.
To make sure that we realize it's not about making us feel good.
It's not about making things that have the most media attention, but it's about making places where we can actually do the most good.
The other objections, I think, that are important to say, is that I'm somehow -- or we are somehow -- positing a false choice.
Of course, we should do all things, in an ideal world -- I would certainly agree.
I think we should do all things, but we don't.
In 1970, the developed world decided we were going to spend twice as much as we did, right now, than in 1970, on the developing world.
Since then our aid has halved.
So it doesn't look like we're actually on the path of suddenly solving all big problems.
Likewise, people are also saying, but what about the Iraq war?
You know, we spend 100 billion dollars -- why don't we spend that on doing good in the world?
I'm all for that.
If any one of you guys can talk Bush into doing that, that's fine.
But the point, of course, is still to say, if you get another 100 billion dollars, we still want to spend that in the best possible way, don't we?
So the real issue here is to get ourselves back and think about what are the right priorities.
I should just mention briefly, is this really the right list that we got out?
You know, when you ask the world's best economists, you inevitably end up asking old, white American men.
And they're not necessarily, you know, great ways of looking at the entire world.
So we actually invited 80 young people from all over the world to come and solve the same problem.
The only two requirements were that they were studying at the university, and they spoke English.
The majority of them were, first, from developing countries.
They had all the same material but they could go vastly outside the scope of discussion, and they certainly did, to come up with their own lists.
And the surprising thing was that the list was very similar -- with malnutrition and diseases at the top and climate change at the bottom.
We've done this many other times.
There's been many other seminars and university students, and different things.
They all come out with very much the same list.
And that gives me great hope, really, in saying that I do believe that there is a path ahead to get us to start thinking about priorities, and saying, what is the important thing in the world?
Of course, in an ideal world, again we'd love to do everything.
But if we don't do it, then we can start thinking about where should we start?
I see the Copenhagen Consensus as a process.
We did it in 2004, and we hope to assemble many more people, getting much better information for 2008, 2012.
Map out the right path for the world -- but also to start thinking about political triage.
To start thinking about saying, "Let's do not the things where we can do very little at a very high cost, not the things that we don't know how to do, but let's do the great things where we can do an enormous amount of good, at very low cost, right now."
At the end of the day, you can disagree with the discussion of how we actually prioritize these, but we have to be honest and frank about saying, if there's some things we do, there are other things we don't do.
If we worry too much about some things, we end by not worrying about other things.
So I hope this will help us make better priorities, and think about how we better work for the world.
Thank you.
I'm going to talk about your mindset.
Does your mindset correspond to my dataset?
(Laughter) If not, one or the other needs upgrading, isn't it?
When I talk to my students about global issues, and I listen to them in the coffee break, they always talk about "we" and "them."
And when they come back into the lecture room I ask them, "What do you mean with "we" and "them"?
"Oh, it's very easy. It's the western world and it's the developing world," they say.
"We learned it in college."
And what is the definition then? "The definition?
Everyone knows," they say.
But then you know, I press them like this.
So one girl said, very cleverly, "It's very easy.
Western world is a long life in a small family.
Developing world is a short life in a large family."
And I like that definition, because it enabled me to transfer their mindset into the dataset.
And here you have the dataset.
So, you can see that what we have on this axis here is size of family. One, two, three, four, five children per woman on this axis.
And here, length of life, life expectancy, 30, 40, 50.
Exactly what the students said was their concept about the world.
And really this is about the bedroom.
Whether the man and woman decide to have small family, and take care of their kids, and how long they will live.
It's about the bathroom and the kitchen. If you have soap, water and food, you know, you can live long.
And the students were right. It wasn't that the world consisted -- the world consisted here, of one set of countries over here, which had large families and short life. Developing world.
And we had one set of countries up there which was the western world.
They had small families and long life.
And you are going to see here the amazing thing that has happened in the world during my lifetime.
Then the developing countries applied soap and water, vaccination.
And all the developing world started to apply family planning.
And partly to USA who help to provide technical advice and investment.
And you see all the world moves over to a two child family, and a life with 60 to 70 years.
But some countries remain back in this area here.
And you can see we still have Afghanistan down here.
We have Liberia. We have Congo.
So we have countries living there.
So the problem I had is that the worldview that my students had corresponds to reality in the world the year their teachers were born.
(Laughter) (Applause) And we, in fact, when we have played this over the world.
I was at the Global Health Conference here in Washington last week, and I could see the wrong concept even active people in United States had, that they didn't realize the improvement of Mexico there, and China, in relation to United States.
Look here when I move them forward.
Here we go.
They catch up. There's Mexico.
It's on par with United States in these two social dimensions.
There was less than five percent of the specialists in Global Health that was aware of this.
This great nation, Mexico, has the problem that arms are coming from North, across the borders, so they had to stop that, because they have this strange relationship to the United States, you know.
But if I would change this axis here, I would instead put income per person.
Income per person. I can put that here.
And we will then see a completely different picture.
By the way, I'm teaching you how to use our website, Gapminder World, while I'm correcting this, because this is a free utility on the net.
And when I now finally got it right, I can go back 200 years in history.
And I can find United States up there.
And I can let the other countries be shown.
And now I have income per person on this axis.
And United States only had some, one, two thousand dollars at that time.
And the life expectancy was 35 to 40 years, on par with Afghanistan today.
And what has happened in the world, I will show now.
This is instead of studying history for one year at university.
You can watch me for one minute now and you'll see the whole thing.
(Laughter) You can see how the brown bubbles, which is west Europe, and the yellow one, which is the United States, they get richer and richer and also start to get healthier and healthier.
And this is now 100 years ago, where the rest of the world remains behind.
Here we come. And that was the influenza.
That's why we are so scared about flu, isn't it?
It's still remembered. The fall of life expectancy.
And then we come up. Not until independence started.
Look here You have China over there, you have India over there, and this is what has happened.
Did you note there, that we have Mexico up there?
Mexico is not at all on par with the United States, but they are quite close.
And especially, it's interesting to see China and the United States during 200 years, because I have my oldest son now working for Google, after Google acquired this software.
Because in fact, this is child labor. My son and his wife sat in a closet for many years and developed this.
And my youngest son, who studied Chinese in Beijing.
So they come in with the two perspectives I have, you know?
And my son, youngest son who studied in Beijing, in China, he got a long-term perspective.
Whereas when my oldest son, who works for Google, he should develop by quarter, or by half-year.
Or Google is quite generous, so he can have one or two years to go.
But in China they look generation after generation because they remember the very embarrassing period, for 100 years, when they went backwards.
And then they would remember the first part of last century, which was really bad, and we could go by this so-called Great Leap Forward.
But this was 1963.
Mao Tse-Tung eventually brought health to China, and then he died, and then Deng Xiaoping started this amazing move forward.
Isn't it strange to see that the United States first grew the economy, and then gradually got rich?
Whereas China could get healthy much earlier, because they applied the knowledge of education, nutrition, and then also benefits of penicillin and vaccines and family planning.
And Asia could have social development before they got the economic development.
So to me, as a public health professor, it's not strange that all these countries grow so fast now.
Because what you see here, what you see here is the flat world of Thomas Friedman, isn't it.
It's not really, really flat.
But the middle income countries -- and this is where I suggest to my students, stop using the concept "developing world."
Because after all, talking about the developing world is like having two chapters in the history of the United States.
The last chapter is about present, and president Obama, and the other is about the past, where you cover everything from Washington to Eisenhower.
Because Washington to Eisenhower, that is what we find in the developing world.
We could actually go to Mayflower to Eisenhower, and that would be put together into a developing world, which is rightly growing its cities in a very amazing way, which have great entrepreneurs, but also have the collapsing countries.
So, how could we make better sense about this?
Well, one way of trying is to see whether we could look at income distribution.
This is the income distribution of peoples in the world, from $1. This is where you have food to eat.
These people go to bed hungry.
And this is the number of people.
This is $10, whether you have a public or a private health service system. This is where you can provide health service for your family and school for your children, and this is OECD countries: Green, Latin America, East Europe.
This is East Asia, and the light blue there is South Asia.
And this is how the world changed.
It changed like this.
Can you see how it's growing? And how hundreds of millions and billions is coming out of poverty in Asia?
And it goes over here?
And I come now, into projections, but I have to stop at the door of Lehman Brothers there, you know, because -- (Laughter) that's where the projections are not valid any longer.
Probably the world will do this.
and then it will continue forward like this.
But more or less, this is what will happen, and we have a world which cannot be looked upon as divided.
We have the high income countries here, with the United States as a leading power; we have the emerging economies in the middle, which provide a lot of the funding for the bailout; and we have the low income countries here.
Yeah, this is a fact that from where the money comes, they have been saving, you know, over the last decade.
And here we have the low income countries where entrepreneurs are.
And here we have the countries in collapse and war, like Afghanistan, Somalia, parts of Congo, Darfur.
We have all this at the same time.
That's why it's so problematic to describe what has happened in the developing world.
Because it's so different, what has happened there.
And that's why I suggest a slightly different approach of what you would call it.
And you have huge differences within countries also.
I heard that your departments here were by regions.
Here you have Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, East Asia, Arab states, East Europe, Latin America, and OECD.
And on this axis, GDP.
And on this, heath, child survival, and it doesn't come as a surprise that Africa south of Sahara is at the bottom.
But when I split it, when I split it into country bubbles, the size of the bubbles here is the population.
Then you see Sierra Leone and Mauritius, completely different.
There is such a difference within Sub-Saharan Africa.
And I can split the others. Here is the South Asian, Arab world.
Now all your different departments.
East Europe, Latin America, and OECD countries.
And here were are. We have a continuum in the world.
We cannot put it into two parts.
It is Mayflower down here. It is Washington here, building, building countries.
It's Lincoln here, advancing them.
It's Eisenhower bringing modernity into the countries.
And then it's United States today, up here.
And we have countries all this way.
Now, this is the important thing of understanding how the world has changed.
At this point I decided to make a pause.
(Laughter) And it is my task, on behalf of the rest of the world, to convey a thanks to the U.S. taxpayers, for Demographic Health Survey.
Many are not aware of -- no, this is not a joke.
This is very serious.
It is due to USA's continuous sponsoring during 25 years of the very good methodology for measuring child mortality that we have a grasp of what's happening in the world.
(Applause) And it is U.S. government at its best, without advocacy, providing facts, that it's useful for the society.
And providing data free of charge on the internet, for the world to use. Thank you very much.
Quite the opposite of the World Bank, who compiled data with government money, tax money, and then they sell it to add a little profit, in a very inefficient, Gutenberg way.
(Applause) But the people doing that at the World Bank are among the best in the world.
And they are highly skilled professionals.
It's just that we would like to upgrade our international agencies to deal with the world in the modern way, as we do.
And when it comes to free data and transparency, United States of America is one of the best.
And that doesn't come easy from the mouth of a Swedish public health professor.
(Laughter) And I'm not paid to come here, no.
I would like to show you what happens with the data, what we can show with this data.
Look here. This is the world.
With income down there and child mortality.
And what has happened in the world?
Since 1950, during the last 50 years we have had a fall in child mortality.
And it is the DHS that makes it possible to know this.
And we had an increase in income.
And the blue former developing countries are mixing up with the former industrialized western world.
We have a continuum. But we still have, of course, Congo, up there. We still have as poor countries as we have had, always, in history.
And that's the bottom billion, where we've heard today about a completely new approach to do it.
And how fast has this happened?
Well, MDG 4.
The United States has not been so eager to use MDG 4.
But you have been the main sponsor that has enabled us to measure it, because it's the only child mortality that we can measure.
And we used to say that it should fall four percent per year.
Let's see what Sweden has done.
We used to boast about fast social progress.
That's where we were, 1900.
1900, Sweden was there.
Same child mortality as Bangladesh had, 1990, though they had lower income.
They started very well. They used the aid well.
They vaccinated the kids. They get better water.
And they reduced child mortality, with an amazing 4.7 percent per year. They beat Sweden.
I run Sweden the same 16 year period.
Second round, it's Sweden, 1916, against Egypt, 1990.
Here we go. Once again the USA is part of the reason here.
They get safe water, they get food for the poor, and they get malaria eradicated.
5.5 percent. They are faster than the millennium development goal.
And third chance for Sweden, against Brazil here.
Brazil here has amazing social improvement over the last 16 years, and they go faster than Sweden.
This means that the world is converging.
The middle income countries, the emerging economy, they are catching up.
They are moving to cities, where they also get better assistance for that.
Well the Swedish students protest at this point.
They say, "This is not fair, because these countries had vaccines and antibiotics that were not available for Sweden.
We have to do real-time competition."
Okay. I give you Singapore, the year I was born.
Singapore had twice the child mortality of Sweden.
It's the most tropical country in the world, a marshland on the equator.
And here we go. It took a little time for them to get independent.
But then they started to grow their economy.
And they made the social investment. They got away malaria.
They got a magnificent health system that beat both the U.S. and Sweden.
We never thought it would happen that they would win over Sweden!
(Applause) All these green countries are achieving millennium development goals.
These yellow are just about to be doing this.
These red are the countries that doesn't do it, and the policy has to be improved.
Not simplistic extrapolation.
We have to really find a way of supporting those countries in a better way.
We have to respect the middle income countries on what they are doing.
And we have to fact-base the whole way we look at the world.
This is dollar per person. This is HIV in the countries.
The blue is Africa.
The size of the bubbles is how many are HIV affected.
You see the tragedy in South Africa there.
About 20 percent of the adult population are infected.
And in spite of them having quite a high income, they have a huge number of HIV infected.
But you also see that there are African countries down here.
There is no such thing as an HIV epidemic in Africa.
There's a number, five to 10 countries in Africa that has the same level as Sweden and United States.
And there are others who are extremely high.
And I will show you that what has happened in one of the best countries, with the most vibrant economy in Africa and a good governance, Botswana.
They have a very high level. It's coming down.
But now it's not falling, because there, with help from PEPFAR, it's working with treatment. And people are not dying.
And you can see it's not that easy, that it is war which caused this.
Because here, in Congo, there is war.
And here, in Zambia, there is peace.
And it's not the economy. Richer country has a little higher.
If I split Tanzania in its income, the richer 20 percent in Tanzania has more HIV than the poorest one.
And it's really different within each country.
Look at the provinces of Kenya. They are very different.
And this is the situation you see.
It's not deep poverty. It's the special situation, probably of concurrent sexual partnership among part of the heterosexual population in some countries, or some parts of countries, in south and eastern Africa.
Don't make it Africa. Don't make it a race issue.
Make it a local issue. And do prevention at each place, in the way it can be done there.
So to just end up, there are things of suffering in the one billion poorest, which we don't know.
Those who live beyond the cellphone, those who have yet to see a computer, those who have no electricity at home.
This is the disease, Konzo, I spent 20 years elucidating in Africa.
It's caused by fast processing of toxic cassava root in famine situation.
It's similar to the pellagra epidemic in Mississippi in the '30s.
It's similar to other nutritional diseases.
It will never affect a rich person.
We have seen it here in Mozambique.
This is the epidemic in Mozambique. This is an epidemic in northern Tanzania.
You never heard about the disease.
But it's much more than Ebola that has been affected by this disease.
Cause crippling throughout the world.
And over the last two years, 2,000 people has been crippled in the southern tip of Bandundu region.
That used to be the illegal diamond trade, from the UNITA-dominated area in Angola.
That has now disappeared, and they are now in great economic problem.
And one week ago, for the first time, there were four lines on the Internet.
Don't get confused of the progress of the emerging economies and the great capacity of people in the middle income countries and in peaceful low income countries.
There is still mystery in one billion.
And we have to have more concepts than just developing countries and developing world.
We need a new mindset. The world is converging, but -- but -- but not the bottom billion.
They are still as poor as they've ever been.
It's not sustainable, and it will not happen around one superpower.
But you will remain one of the most important superpowers, and the most hopeful superpower, for the time to be.
And this institution will have a very crucial role, not for United States, but for the world.
So you have a very bad name, State Department. This is not the State Department.
It's the World Department.
And we have a high hope in you. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I love theater.
I love the idea that you can transform, become somebody else and look at life with a completely new perspective.
I love the idea that people will sit in one room for a couple of hours and listen.
The idea that in that room at that moment, everyone, regardless of their age, their gender, their race, their color, their religion, comes together.
At that moment, we transcend space and time together.
Theater awakens our senses and opens the door to our imagination.
And our ability to imagine is what makes us explorers.
Our ability to imagine makes us inventors and creators and unique.
I was commissioned in 2003 to create an original show, and began developing "Upwake."
"Upwake" tells the story of Zero, a modern-day business man, going to work with his life in a suitcase, stuck between dream and reality and not able to decipher the two.
I wanted "Upwake" to have the same audiovisual qualities as a movie would.
And I wanted to let my imagination run wild.
So I began drawing the story that was moving in my head.
If Antoine de Saint-Exupery, the author of "The Little Prince," were here, he would have drawn three holes inside that box and told you your sheep was inside.
Because, if you look closely enough, things will begin to appear.
This is not a box; these are the renderings of my imagination from head to paper to screen to life.
In "Upwake" buildings wear suits, Zero tap dances on a giant keyboard, clones himself with a scanner, tames and whips the computer mice, sails away into dreamscape from a single piece of paper and launches into space.
I wanted to create environments that moved and morphed like an illusionist.
Go from one world to another in a second.
I wanted to have humor, beauty, simplicity and complexity and use metaphors to suggest ideas.
At the beginning of the show, for example, Zero deejays dream and reality.
Technology is an instrument that allowed me to manifest my visions in high definition, live, on stage.
So today, I would like to talk to you about the relationship between theater and technology.
Let's start with technology.
(Fuse blowing) All right. Let's start with theater.
(Laughter) (Buzzing) (Click, click, bang) (Laughter) (Applause) Thank you.
"Upwake" lasts 52 minutes and 54 seconds.
I project 3D animation on all the four surfaces of the stage which I interact with.
The use of animation and projection was a process of discovery.
I didn't use it as a special effect, but as a partner on stage.
There are no special effects in "Upwake," no artifice.
It's as lavish and intricate as it is simple and minimal.
Three hundred and forty-four frames, four and a half years and commissions later, what started as a one person show became a collaborative work of nineteen most talented artists.
And here are some excerpts.
(Applause) Thank you.
So this is, relatively, a new show that we're now beginning to tour.
And in Austin, Texas, I was asked to give small demonstrations in schools during the afternoon.
When I arrived at one of the schools, I certainly did not expect this: Six hundred kids, packed in a gymnasium, waiting.
I was a little nervous performing without animation, costume -- really -- and make-up.
But the teachers came to me afterward and told me they hadn't seen the kids that attentive.
And I think the reason why is that I was able to use their language and their reality in order to transport them into another.
Something happened along the way.
Zero became a person and not just a character in a play.
Zero does not speak, is neither man nor woman.
Zero is Zero, a little hero of the 21st Century, and Zero can touch so many more people than I possibly could.
It's as much about bringing new disciplines inside this box as it is about taking theater out of its box.
As a street performer, I have learned that everybody wants to connect.
And that usually, if you're a bit extraordinary, if you're not exactly of human appearance, then people will feel inclined to participate and to feel out loud.
It's as though you made something resonate within them.
It's as though the mystery of the person they're interacting with and connecting allows them to be themselves just a bit more.
Because through your mask, they let theirs go.
Being human is an art form.
I know theater can improve the quality of people's lives, and I know theater can heal.
I've worked as a doctor clown in a hospital for two years.
I have seen sick kids and sad parents and doctors be lifted and transported in moments of pure joy.
I know theater unites us.
Zero wants to engage the generation of today and tomorrow, tell various stories through different mediums.
Comic books. Quantum physics video games.
And Zero wants to go to the moon.
In 2007, Zero launched a green campaign, suggesting his friends and fans to turn off their electricity every Sunday from 7:53 to 8:00 p.m.
The idea is simple, basic. It's not original, but it's important, and it's important to participate.
There is a revolution.
It's a human and technological revolution.
It's motion and emotion.
It's information.
It's visual. It's musical. It's sensorial.
It's conceptual. It's universal. It's beyond words and numbers.
It's happening.
The natural progression of science and art finding each other to better touch and define the human experience.
There is a revolution in the way that we think, in the way that we share, and the way that we express our stories, our evolution.
This is a time of communication, connection and creative collaboration.
Charlie Chaplin innovated motion pictures and told stories through music, silence, humor and poetry.
He was social, and his character, The Tramp, spoke to millions.
He gave entertainment, pleasure and relief to so many human beings when they needed it the most.
We are not here to question the possible; we are here to challenge the impossible.
In the science of today, we become artists.
In the art of today, we become scientists.
We design our world. We invent possibilities.
We teach, touch and move.
It is now that we can use the diversity of our talents to create intelligent, meaningful and extraordinary work. It's now.
(Ringing) Thank you.
(Applause)
I've been fascinated with crop diversity for about 35 years from now, ever since I stumbled across a fairly obscure academic article by a guy named Jack Harlan.
And he described the diversity within crops -- all the different kinds of wheat and rice and such -- as a genetic resource.
And he said, "This genetic resource," -- and I'll never forget the words -- "stands between us and catastrophic starvation on a scale we cannot imagine."
I figured he was either really on to something, or he was one of these academic nutcases.
So, I looked a little further, and what I figured out was that he wasn't a nutcase.
He was the most respected scientist in the field.
What he understood was that biological diversity -- crop diversity -- is the biological foundation of agriculture.
It's the raw material, the stuff, of evolution in our agricultural crops.
Not a trivial matter.
And he also understood that that foundation was crumbling, literally crumbling.
That indeed, a mass extinction was underway in our fields, in our agricultural system.
And that this mass extinction was taking place with very few people noticing and even fewer caring.
Now, I know that many of you don't stop to think about diversity in agricultural systems and, let's face it, that's logical.
You don't see it in the newspaper every day.
And when you go into the supermarket, you certainly don't see a lot of choices there.
You see apples that are red, yellow, and green and that's about it.
So, let me show you a picture of one form of diversity.
Here's some beans, and there are about 35 or 40 different varieties of beans on this picture.
Now, imagine each one of these varieties as being distinct from another about the same way as a poodle from a Great Dane.
If I wanted to show you a picture of all the dog breeds in the world, and I put 30 or 40 of them on a slide, it would take about 10 slides because there about 400 breeds of dogs in the world.
But there are 35 to 40,000 different varieties of beans.
So if I were to going to show you all the beans in the world, and I had a slide like this, and I switched it every second, it would take up my entire TED talk, and I wouldn't have to say anything.
But the interesting thing is that this diversity -- and the tragic thing is -- that this diversity is being lost.
We have about 200,000 different varieties of wheat, and we have about 2 to 400,000 different varieties of rice, but it's being lost.
And I want to give you an example of that.
It's a bit of a personal example, in fact.
In the United States, in the 1800s -- that's where we have the best data -- farmers and gardeners were growing 7,100 named varieties of apples.
Imagine that. 7,100 apples with names.
Today, 6,800 of those are extinct, no longer to be seen again.
I used to have a list of these extinct apples, and when I would go out and give a presentation, I would pass the list out in the audience.
I wouldn't tell them what it was, but it was in alphabetical order, and I would tell them to look for their names, their family names, their mother's maiden name.
And at the end of the speech, I would ask, "How many people have found a name?"
And I never had fewer than two-thirds of an audience hold up their hand.
And I said, "You know what? These apples come from your ancestors, and your ancestors gave them the greatest honor they could give them.
They gave them their name.
The bad news is they're extinct.
The good news is a third of you didn't hold up your hand. Your apple's still out there.
Find it. Make sure it doesn't join the list."
So, I want to tell you that the piece of the good news is that the Fowler apple is still out there.
And there's an old book back here, and I want to read a piece from it.
This book was published in 1904.
It's called "The Apples of New York" and this is the second volume.
See, we used to have a lot of apples.
And the Fowler apple is described in here -- I hope this doesn't surprise you -- as, "a beautiful fruit."
(Laughter) I don't know if we named the apple or if the apple named us, but ...
but, to be honest, the description goes on and it says that it "doesn't rank high in quality, however."
And then he has to go even further.
It sounds like it was written by an old school teacher of mine.
"As grown in New York, the fruit usually fails to develop properly in size and quality and is, on the whole, unsatisfactory."
(Laughter) And I guess there's a lesson to be learned here, and the lesson is: so why save it?
I get this question all the time. Why don't we just save the best one?
And there are a couple of answers to that question.
One thing is that there is no such thing as a best one.
Today's best variety is tomorrow's lunch for insects or pests or disease.
The other thing is that maybe that Fowler apple or maybe a variety of wheat that's not economical right now has disease or pest resistance or some quality that we're going to need for climate change that the others don't.
So it's not necessary, thank God, that the Fowler apple is the best apple in the world.
It's just necessary or interesting that it might have one good, unique trait.
And for that reason, we ought to be saving it.
Why? As a raw material, as a trait we can use in the future.
Think of diversity as giving us options.
And options, of course, are exactly what we need in an era of climate change.
I want to show you two slides, but first, I want to tell you that we've been working at the Global Crop Diversity Trust with a number of scientists -- particularly at Stanford and University of Washington -- to ask the question: What's going to happen to agriculture in an era of climate change and what kind of traits and characteristics do we need in our agricultural crops to be able to adapt to this?
In short, the answer is that in the future, in many countries, the coldest growing seasons are going to be hotter than anything those crops have seen in the past.
The coldest growing seasons of the future, hotter than the hottest of the past.
Is agriculture adapted to that?
I don't know. Can fish play the piano?
If agriculture hasn't experienced that, how could it be adapted?
Now, the highest concentration of poor and hungry people in the world, and the place where climate change, ironically, is going to be the worst is in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.
So I've picked two examples here, and I want to show you.
In the histogram before you now, the blue bars represent the historical range of temperatures, going back about far as we have temperature data.
And you can see that there's some difference between one growing season and another.
Some are colder, some are hotter and it's a bell shaped curve.
The tallest bar is the average temperature for the most number of growing seasons.
In the future, later this century, it's going to look like the red, totally out of bounds.
The agricultural system and, more importantly, the crops in the field in India have never experienced this before.
Here's South Africa. The same story.
But the most interesting thing about South Africa is we don't have to wait for 2070 for there to be trouble.
By 2030, if the maize, or corn, varieties, which is the dominant crop -- 50 percent of the nutrition in Southern Africa are still in the field -- in 2030, we'll have a 30 percent decrease in production of maize because of the climate change already in 2030.
30 percent decrease of production in the context of increasing population, that's a food crisis. It's global in nature.
We will watch children starve to death on TV.
Now, you may say that 20 years is a long way off.
It's two breeding cycles for maize.
We have two rolls of the dice to get this right.
We have to get climate-ready crops in the field, and we have to do that rather quickly.
Now, the good news is that we have conserved.
We have collected and conserved a great deal of biological diversity, agricultural diversity, mostly in the form of seed, and we put it in seed banks, which is a fancy way of saying a freezer.
If you want to conserve seed for a long term and you want to make it available to plant breeders and researchers, you dry it and then you freeze it.
Unfortunately, these seed banks are located around the world in buildings and they're vulnerable.
Disasters have happened. In recent years we lost the gene bank, the seed bank in Iraq and Afghanistan. You can guess why.
In Rwanda, in the Solomon Islands.
And then there are just daily disasters that take place in these buildings, financial problems and mismanagement and equipment failures, and all kinds of things, and every time something like this happens, it means extinction. We lose diversity.
And I'm not talking about losing diversity in the same way that you lose your car keys.
I'm talking about losing it in the same way that we lost the dinosaurs: actually losing it, never to be seen again.
So, a number of us got together and decided that, you know, enough is enough and we need to do something about that and we need to have a facility that can really offer protection for our biological diversity of -- maybe not the most charismatic diversity.
You don't look in the eyes of a carrot seed quite in the way you do a panda bear, but it's very important diversity.
So we needed a really safe place, and we went quite far north to find it.
To Svalbard, in fact.
This is above mainland Norway. You can see Greenland there.
That's at 78 degrees north.
It's as far as you can fly on a regularly scheduled airplane.
It's a remarkably beautiful landscape. I can't even begin to describe it to you.
It's otherworldly, beautiful.
We worked with the Norwegian government and with the NorGen, the Norwegian Genetic Resources Program, to design this facility.
What you see is an artist's conception of this facility, which is built in a mountain in Svalbard.
The idea of Svalbard was that it's cold, so we get natural freezing temperatures.
But it's remote. It's remote and accessible so it's safe and we don't depend on mechanical refrigeration.
This is more than just an artist's dream, it's now a reality.
And this next picture shows it in context, in Svalbard.
And here's the front door of this facility.
When you open up the front door, this is what you're looking at. It's pretty simple. It's a hole in the ground.
It's a tunnel, and you go into the tunnel, chiseled in solid rock, about 130 meters.
There are now a couple of security doors, so you won't see it quite like this.
Again, when you get to the back, you get into an area that's really my favorite place.
I think of it as sort of a cathedral.
And I know that this tags me as a bit of a nerd, but ...
(Laughter) Some of the happiest days of my life have been spent ...
(Laughter) in this place there.
(Applause) If you were to walk into one of these rooms, you would see this.
It's not very exciting, but if you know what's there, it's pretty emotional.
We have now about 425,000 samples of unique crop varieties.
There's 70,000 samples of different varieties of rice in this facility right now.
About a year from now, we'll have over half a million samples.
We're going up to over a million, and someday we'll basically have samples -- about 500 seeds -- of every variety of agricultural crop that can be stored in a frozen state in this facility.
This is a backup system for world agriculture.
It's a backup system for all the seed banks. Storage is free.
It operates like a safety deposit box.
Norway owns the mountain and the facility, but the depositors own the seed.
And if anything happens, then they can come back and get it.
This particular picture that you see shows the national collection of the United States, of Canada, and an international institution from Syria.
I think it's interesting in that this facility, I think, is almost the only thing I can think of these days where countries, literally, every country in the world -- because we have seeds from every country in the world -- all the countries of the world have gotten together to do something that's both long term, sustainable and positive.
I can't think of anything else that's happened in my lifetime that way.
I can't look you in the eyes and tell you that I have a solution for climate change, for the water crisis.
Agriculture takes 70 percent of fresh water supplies on earth.
I can't look you in the eyes and tell you that there is such a solution for those things, or the energy crisis, or world hunger, or peace in conflict.
I can't look you in the eyes and tell you that I have a simple solution for that, but I can look you in the eyes and tell you that we can't solve any of those problems if we don't have crop diversity.
Because I challenge you to think of an effective, efficient, sustainable solution to climate change if we don't have crop diversity.
Because, quite literally, if agriculture doesn't adapt to climate change, neither will we.
And if crops don't adapt to climate change, neither will agriculture, neither will we.
So, this is not something pretty and nice to do.
There are a lot of people who would love to have this diversity exist just for the existence value of it.
It is, I agree, a nice thing to do.
But it's a necessary thing to do.
So, in a very real sense, I believe that we, as an international community, should get organized to complete the task.
The Svalbard Global Seed Vault is a wonderful gift that Norway and others have given us, but it's not the complete answer.
We need to collect the remaining diversity that's out there.
We need to put it into good seed banks that can offer those seeds to researchers in the future.
We need to catalog it. It's a library of life, but right now I would say we don't have a card catalog for it.
And we need to support it financially.
My big idea would be that while we think of it as commonplace to endow an art museum or endow a chair at a university, we really ought to be thinking about endowing wheat.
30 million dollars in an endowment would take care of preserving all the diversity in wheat forever.
So we need to be thinking a little bit in those terms.
And my final thought is that we, of course, by conserving wheat, rice, potatoes, and the other crops, we may, quite simply, end up saving ourselves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Picture yourself driving down the road tomorrow, heading somewhere to buy an item you found on Craigslist, perhaps a nice mountain bike for 3,000 dollars.
At that price, it's probably one of those bikes with a little electric motor on it -- (Laughter) maybe some streamers from the handlebars.
(Laughter) The seller has declared this a cash-only deal, so you have, in the console of your car, 3,000 dollars.
Suddenly, you are pulled over.
During the stop, the officer asks, "Do you have any drugs, weapons or large amounts of cash in your car?"
You truthfully answer, "Yes," not to the drugs or to the weapons, but to the cash.
In the blink of an eye, you are ordered out of your car.
The officer searches it and finds your cash.
On the spot, he seizes it, and he says he suspects it's part of a drug crime.
A few days later, the local district attorney files paperwork to keep your money -- permanently.
And all of this happens without you ever being charged or convicted of any crime.
Now, you might be saying, "Ah, this would never happen in the United States."
(Laughter) Incidents like this occur every day in our country.
It's one of the most significant threats to your property rights most people have never even heard of.
It's called "civil forfeiture."
Most of you are generally aware of criminal forfeiture, although the term itself might be a little unfamiliar, so let's begin with forfeiture.
When we forfeit something, we give up that thing, or we're forced to give it up.
In criminal forfeiture, someone is charged and convicted of a crime, and therefore, they have to give up property related to that crime.
For example, suppose you use your car to transport and deal drugs.
You're caught and convicted; now you have to give up or forfeit your car as part of the sentencing.
That's criminal forfeiture.
But in civil forfeiture, no person is charged with a crime -- the property is charged and convicted of a crime.
(Laughter) You heard that correctly: the government actually convicts an inanimate object with a crime.
It's as if that thing itself committed the crime.
That's why civil forfeiture cases have these really peculiar names, like, "The United States of America v. One 1990 Ford Thunderbird."
(Laughter) Or "The State of Oklahoma v. 53,234 Dollars in Cash."
(Laughter) Or my personal favorite: "The United States of America v. One Solid Gold Object in the Form of a Rooster."
(Laughter) Now, you're thinking: How does something like this happen?
That's exactly what I said when I first learned about civil forfeiture while on a road trip with my wife.
No, we did not get pulled over.
(Laughter) I was reading about the history of civil forfeiture as part of my work as a research director at the law firm, and I came across one of the cases I just mentioned, "The United States of America v. One 1990 Ford Thunderbird."
In that case, Carol Thomas loaned her car to her son.
While in the car, her son committed a minor drug crime.
Carol didn't commit any crime, so law enforcement couldn't convict her and take the car, but they could -- and did -- use civil forfeiture to "convict the car" and take it.
Carol was completely innocent, but she lost her car nonetheless.
In other words, she was punished for a crime she did not commit.
When I read this, I was gobsmacked.
How could this occur?
How is this even legal?
It turns out, it began in our country with maritime law.
Early in our republic, the government sought to fight piracy -- yes, actual pirates.
The problem was the government often couldn't catch the pirates, so instead it used civil forfeiture to convict the pirates' property and take it, and therefore deny the pirates their illegal profits.
Of course, the government could've simply taken and kept the booty without necessarily using civil forfeiture, but doing so would have violated our most basic due process and property rights.
Now, the government rarely used civil forfeiture until the 1980s and the war on drugs.
We expanded civil forfeiture law to cover drug crimes and then later, other types of crime.
Canada and the European Union adopted similar provisions so that now all kinds of people are ensnared in the forfeiture web, people like Russ Caswell.
Russ Caswell owned a small budget motel in Tewksbury, Massachusetts.
His father built the motel in 1955, and Russ took it over in the 1980s.
During the years that Russ owned the motel, from time to time, people would rent rooms, and they would commit drug crimes.
Russ didn't condone the activities -- in fact, whenever he found out about it, he would immediately call police.
Russ was entirely innocent of any crime, but that did not stop the US Department of Justice from seizing his motel simply because other people committed crimes there.
But Russ's case was not alone.
Between 1997 and 2016, the US Department of Justice took more than 635,000 properties.
This means each year, tens of thousands of people lose their properties in cases in which they're never charged or convicted of any crime.
And we're not necessarily talking about major drug kingpins or headline-grabbing financial fraudsters whose cases involve hundreds of thousands if not millions of dollars.
Many of these seizures and forfeitures involve just everyday people like Russ Caswell or you or me.
But it gets worse.
Are you wondering: Where does all this cash and property end up?
In most places, law enforcement keeps it.
And they use it to buy equipment or pay for building repairs or even pay salaries and overtime.
This is a clear conflict of interest.
It creates a perverse profit incentive that can distort law enforcement.
And this is a problem that's not lost on those in law enforcement, either.
Former chief of police in Rochester, Minnesota, Roger Peterson, described the choice that police officers often face.
As he described it: suppose I'm a police officer, and I see a drug deal.
Now I face a choice: Do I go after the buyer and remove from the street illegal drugs, or do I go after the seller and get cash for my agency to use?
So it's easy to see why a police officer might go for the cash.
It was just such a circumstance that compelled police officers in Philadelphia to seize an entire house.
In 2014, Chris and Markela Sourovelis' son sold 40 dollars worth of drugs down the street from their house.
Forty dollars.
The police watched the deal go down.
They could've arrested the buyer and confiscated the drugs, but they didn't.
They could've arrested the Sourovelises' son right there on the street and grabbed 40 dollars.
But they didn't.
They waited to arrest him at home, because then they could seize their entire house.
The house was worth 350,000 dollars.
That is what I mean by a perverse profit incentive.
But the Sourovelises' case was no outlier.
Philadelphia, the "City of Brotherly Love," the "Athens of America," the "Cradle of Liberty," birthplace to the Constitution, home to the Liberty Bell and Independence Hall, the "City that Loves you Back" -- (Laughter) that Philadelphia was running a forfeiture machine.
Between 2002 and 2016, Philadelphia took more than 77 million dollars through forfeiture, including 1,200 homes.
Cars, jewelry, electronics -- all of it they sold, the proceeds they kept.
And they would have kept right on doing it, had it not been for a class-action lawsuit -- our team's class-action lawsuit -- (Applause and cheers) Thank you.
We forced them to change their forfeiture practices and to compensate victims.
(Applause and cheers) When our team first began researching forfeiture in 2007, we had no idea how much forfeiture revenue there was.
In fact, no one knew.
It wasn't until our groundbreaking study, "Policing for Profit," that we found federal law enforcement agencies have taken in almost 40 billion dollars -- billion with a B -- since 2001, more than 80 percent of that through civil forfeiture.
Unfortunately, we have no idea how much state and local agencies have taken in, because in many states, they don't have to report it.
So until we reform forfeiture, we'll never know how much forfeiture activity actually occurs in the United States.
And we desperately need reform.
Legislatures should abolish civil forfeiture and replace it with criminal forfeiture.
And all forfeiture proceeds should go to a neutral fund such as a general fund.
When forfeiture proceeds stop hitting law enforcement budgets directly, that is when we will end policing for profit.
(Applause) Now, as you can imagine, law enforcement officials don't love these recommendations.
(Laughter) They stand to lose a lot of money, and they believe civil forfeiture is an effective crime-fighting tool.
The trouble is, it's not.
In June 2019, we released a study that found forfeiture does not improve crime-fighting.
And the report also found that law enforcement agencies pursue more forfeiture money during economic downturns.
So when city and county budgets are tight, law enforcement will use forfeiture to find the money.
So it's no wonder, then, that law enforcement officials predict a criminal apocalypse -- (Laughter) if these reforms are adopted.
But some states have already implemented them, and we're pushing for reform all across the country, because until we reform forfeiture, this is something that could happen to any of us.
It can happen in the United States, it can happen in the United Kingdom, it can happen in countries throughout the European Union and beyond.
People like you and me and the Sourovelises and Russ Caswell, just doing the everyday stuff of life, can be caught in a scheme we never thought possible.
It is time we end policing for profit once and for all.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
This is the tale of two ancient cities and the trees that determined their destinies.
In 3,000 BC Uruk was more densely populated than modern day New York City.
This crowded capital had to continually expand their irrigation system to feed its growing population.
2,500 years later in Sri Lanka, the city of Anuradhapura had a similar problem.
They were also growing constantly, and like Uruk, their city relied heavily on an elaborate irrigation system.
As Uruk grew, its farmers began chopping down trees to make space for more crops.
In Anuradhapura, however, trees were sacred.
Their city housed an offshoot of the Bodhi tree under which Buddha himself was said to have attained enlightenment.
Religious reverence slowed farmer’s axes and even led the city to plant additional trees in urban parks.
Initially, Uruk’s expansion worked well.
But without trees to filter their water supply, Uruk’s irrigation system became contaminated.
Evaporating water left mineral deposits, which rendered the soil too salty for agriculture.
Conversely, Anuradhapura’s irrigation system was designed to work in concert with the surrounding forest.
Their city eventually grew to more than twice Uruk’s population, and today, Anuradhapura still cares for a tree planted over 2,000 years ago.
We may think of nature as being unconnected to our urban spaces, but trees have always been an essential part of successful cities.
Trees act like a natural sponge, absorbing storm water runoff before releasing it back into the atmosphere.
The webs of their roots protect against mudslides while allowing soil to retain water and filter out toxins.
Roots help prevent floods, while reducing the need for storm drains and water treatment plants.
Their porous leaves purify the air by trapping carbon and other pollutants, making them essential in the fight against climate change.
Humanity has been uncovering these arboreal benefits for centuries.
But trees aren’t just crucial to the health of a city’s infrastructure; they play a vital role in the health of its citizens as well.
In the 1870’s, Manhattan had few trees outside the island’s parks.
Without trees to provide shade, buildings absorbed up to nine times more solar radiation during deadly summer heat waves.
Combined with the period’s poor sanitation standards, the oppressive heat made the city a breeding ground for bacteria like cholera.
In modern day Hong Kong, tall skyscrapers and underground infrastructure make it difficult for trees to grow.
This contributes to the city’s dangerously poor air quality, which can cause bronchitis and diminished lung function.
Trees affect our mental health as well.
Research indicates that the presence of green foliage increases attention spans and decreases stress levels.
It’s even been shown that hospital patients with views of brick walls recover more slowly than those with views of trees.
Fortunately, many cities are full of views like this— and that’s no accident.
As early as the 18th century, city planners began to embrace the importance of urban trees.
In 1733, Colonel James Oglethorpe planned the city of Savannah, Georgia to ensure that no neighborhood was more than a 2-minute walk from a park.
After World War II, Copenhagen directed all new development along five arteries— each sandwiched between a park.
This layout increased the city’s resilience to pollution and natural disasters.
And urban trees don’t just benefit people.
Portland’s Forest Park preserves the region’s natural biodiversity, making the city home to various local plants, 112 bird species, and 62 species of mammals.
No city is more committed to trees than Singapore.
Since 1967, Singapore’s government has planted over 1.2 million trees, including those within 50-meter tall vertical gardens called supertrees.
These structures sustain themselves and nearby conservatories with solar energy and collected rainwater.
Trees and vegetation currently cover over 50% of Singapore’s landmass, reducing the need for air conditioning and encouraging low-pollution transportation.
By 2050, it’s estimated that over 65% of the world will be living in cities.
City planners can lay an eco-friendly foundation, but it’s up to the people who live in these urban forests to make them homes for more than humans.
I'm going to tell you about one of the world's largest problems and how it can be solved.
I'd like to start with a little experiment.
Could you put your hand up if you wear glasses or contact lenses, or you've had laser refractive surgery?
Now, unfortunately, there are too many of you for me to do the statistics properly.
But it looks like -- I'm guessing -- that it'll be about 60 percent of the room because that's roughly the fraction of developed world population that have some sort of vision correction.
The World Health Organization estimates -- well, they make various estimates of the number of people who need glasses -- the lowest estimate is 150 million people.
They also have an estimate of around a billion.
But in fact, I would argue that we've just done an experiment here and now, which shows us that the global need for corrective eyewear is around half of any population.
And the problem of poor vision, is actually not just a health problem, it's also an educational problem, and it's an economic problem, and it's a quality of life problem.
Glasses are not very expensive. They're quite plentiful.
The problem is, there aren't enough eye care professionals in the world to use the model of the delivery of corrective eyewear that we have in the developed world.
There are just way too few eye care professionals.
So this little slide here shows you an optometrist and the little blue person represents about 10,000 people and that's the ratio in the U.K.
This is the ratio of optometrists to people in sub-Saharan Africa.
In fact, there are some countries in sub-Saharan Africa where there's one optometrist for eight million of the population.
How do you do this? How do you solve this problem?
I came up with a solution to this problem, and I came up with a solution based on adaptive optics for this.
And the idea is you make eye glasses, and you adjust them yourself and that solves the problem.
What I want to do is to show you that one can make a pair of glasses.
I shall just show you how you make a pair of glasses. I shall pop this in my pocket.
I'm short sighted. I look at the signs at the end, I can hardly see them.
So -- okay, I can now see that man running out there, and I can see that guy running out there.
I've now made prescription eyewear to my prescription.
Next step in my process.
So, I've now made eye glasses to my prescription.
Okay, so I've made these glasses and ...
Okay, I've made the glasses to my prescription and ...
... I've just ...
And I've now made some glasses. That's it.
(Applause) Now, these aren't the only pair in the world.
In fact, this technology's been evolving.
I started working on it in 1985, and it's been evolving very slowly.
There are about 30,000 in use now.
And they're in fifteen countries. They're spread around the world.
And I have a vision, which I'll share with you.
I have a global vision for vision.
And that vision is to try to get a billion people wearing the glasses they need by the year 2020.
To do that -- this is an early example of the technology.
The technology is being further developed -- the cost has to be brought down.
This pair, in fact, these currently cost about 19 dollars.
But the cost has to be brought right down.
It has to be brought down because we're trying to serve populations who live on a dollar a day.
How do you solve this problem?
You start to get into detail.
And on this slide, I'm basically explaining all the problems you have.
How do you distribute? How do you work out how to fit the thing?
How do you have people realizing that they have a vision problem?
How do you deal with the industry?
And the answer to that is research.
What we've done is to set up the Center for Vision in the Developing World here in the university.
If you want to know more, just come have a look at our website. Thank you.
(Applause)
Last year, some BuzzFeed employees were scheming to prank their boss, Ze Frank, on his birthday.
They decided to put a family of baby goats in his office.
(Laughter) Now, BuzzFeed had recently signed on to the Facebook Live experiment, and so naturally, we decided to livestream the whole event on the internet to capture the moment when Ze would walk in and discover livestock in his office.
We thought the whole thing would last maybe 10 minutes, and a few hundred company employees would log in for the inside joke.
But what happened?
Ze kept on getting delayed: he went to get a drink, he was called to a meeting, the meeting ran long, he went to the bathroom.
More and more people started logging in to watch the goats.
By the time Ze walked in more than 30 minutes later, 90,000 viewers were watching the livestream.
Now, our team had a lot of discussion about this video and why it was so successful.
It wasn't the biggest live video that we had done to date.
The biggest one that we had done involved a fountain of cheese.
But it performed so much better than we had expected.
What was it about the goats in the office that we didn't anticipate?
Now, a reasonable person could have any number of hypotheses.
Maybe people love baby animals.
Maybe people love office pranks.
Maybe people love stories about their bosses or birthday surprises.
But our team wasn't really thinking about what the video was about.
We were thinking about what the people watching the video were thinking and feeling.
We read some of the 82,000 comments that were made during the video, and we hypothesized that they were excited because they were participating in the shared anticipation of something that was about to happen.
They were part of a community, just for an instant, and it made them happy.
So we decided that we needed to test this hypothesis.
What could we do to test this very same thing?
The following week, armed with the additional knowledge that food videos are very popular, we dressed two people in hazmat suits and wrapped rubber bands around a watermelon until it exploded.
(Laughter) Eight hundred thousand people watched the 690th rubber band explode the watermelon, marking it as the biggest Facebook Live event to date.
The question I get most frequently is: How do you make something go viral?
The question itself is misplaced; it's not about the something.
It's about what the people doing the something, reading or watching -- what are they thinking?
Now, most media companies, when they think about metadata, they think about subjects or formats.
It's about goats, it's about office pranks, it's about food, it's a list or a video or a quiz, it's 2,000 words long, it's 15 minutes long, it has 23 embedded tweets or 15 images.
Now, that kind of metadata is mildly interesting, but it doesn't actually get at what really matters.
What if, instead of tagging what articles or videos are about, what if we asked: How is it helping our users do a real job in their lives?
Last year, we started a project to formally categorize our content in this way.
We called it, "cultural cartography."
It formalized an informal practice that we've had for a really long time: don't just think about the subject matter; think also about, and in fact, primarily about, the job that your content is doing for the reader or the viewer.
Let me show you the map that we have today.
Each bubble is a specific job, and each group of bubbles in a specific color are related jobs.
First up: humor.
"Makes me laugh."
There are so many ways to make somebody laugh.
You can be laughing at someone, you could laugh at specific internet humor, you could be laughing at some good, clean, inoffensive dad jokes.
"This is me." Identity.
People are increasingly using media to explain, "This is who I am.
This is my upbringing, this is my culture, this is my fandom, this is my guilty pleasure, and this is how I laugh about myself."
"Helps me connect with another person."
This is one of the greatest gifts of the internet.
It's amazing when you find a piece of media that precisely describes your bond with someone.
This is the group of jobs that helps me do something -- helps me settle an argument, helps me learn something about myself or another person, or helps me explain my story.
This is the group of jobs that makes me feel something -- makes me curious or sad or restores my faith in humanity.
Many media companies and creators do put themselves in their audiences' shoes.
But in the age of social media, we can go much farther.
People are connected to each other on Facebook, on Twitter, and they're increasingly using media to have a conversation and to talk to each other.
If we can be a part of establishing a deeper connection between two people, then we will have done a real job for these people.
Let me give you some examples of how this plays out.
This is one of my favorite lists: "32 Memes You Should Send Your Sister Immediately" -- immediately.
For example, "When you're going through your sister's stuff, and you hear her coming up the stairs."
Absolutely, I've done that.
"Watching your sister get in trouble for something that you did and blamed on her."
Yes, I've done that as well.
This list got three million views.
Why is that?
Because it did, very well, several jobs: "This is us."
"Connect with family."
"Makes me laugh."
Here are some of the thousands and thousands of comments that sisters sent to each other using this list.
Sometimes we discover what jobs do after the fact.
This quiz, "Pick an Outfit and We'll Guess Your Exact Age and Height," went very viral: 10 million views.
Ten million views.
I mean -- did we actually determine the exact age and height of 10 million people?
That's incredible. It's incredible.
In fact, we didn't.
(Laughter) Turns out that this quiz went extremely viral among a group of 55-and-up women -- (Laughter) who were surprised and delighted that BuzzFeed determined that they were 28 and 5'9".
(Laughter) "They put me at 34 years younger and seven inches taller.
I dress for comfort and do not give a damn what anyone says.
Age is a state of mind."
This quiz was successful not because it was accurate, but because it allowed these ladies to do a very important job -- the humblebrag.
Now, we can even apply this framework to recipes and food.
A recipe's normal job is to tell you what to make for dinner or for lunch.
And this is how you would normally brainstorm for a recipe: you figure out what ingredients you want to use, what recipe that makes, and then maybe you slap a job on at the end to sell it.
But what if we flipped it around and thought about the job first?
One brainstorming session involved the job of bonding.
So, could we make a recipe that brought people together?
This is not a normal brainstorming process at a food publisher.
So we know that people like to bake together, and we know that people like to do challenges together, so we decided to come up with a recipe that involved those two things, and we challenged ourselves: Could we get people to say, "Hey, BFF, let's see if we can do this together"?
The resulting video was the "Fudgiest Brownies Ever" video.
It was enormously successful in every metric possible -- 70 million views.
And people said the exact things that we were going after: "Hey, Colette, we need to make these, are you up for a challenge?"
"Game on."
It did the job that it set out to do, which was to bring people together over baking and chocolate.
I'm really excited about the potential for this project.
When we talk about this framework with our content creators, they instantly get it, no matter what beat they cover, what country they’re in, or what language they speak.
So cultural cartography has helped us massively scale our workforce training.
When we talk about this project and this framework with advertisers and brands, they also instantly get it, because advertisers, more often than media companies, understand how important it is to understand the job that their products are doing for customers.
But the reason I'm the most excited about this project is because it changes the relationship between media and data.
Most media companies think of media as "mine."
How many fans do I have?
How many followers have I gained?
How many views have I gotten?
How many unique IDs do I have in my data warehouse?
But that misses the true value of data, which is that it's yours.
If we can capture in data what really matters to you, and if we can understand more the role that our work plays in your actual life, the better content we can create for you, and the better that we can reach you.
Who are you?
How did you get there?
Where are you going?
What do you care about?
What can you teach us?
That's cultural cartography.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Two years ago, I set off from central London on the Tube and ended up somewhere in the east of the city walking into a self-storage unit to meet a guy that had 2,000 luxury polo shirts for sale.
And as I made my way down the corridor, a broken, blinking light made it just like the cliche scene from a gangster movie.
Our man was early, and he was waiting for me in front of a unit secured with four padlocks down the side.
On our opening exchange, it was like a verbal sparring match where he threw the first punches.
Who was I? Did I have a business card?
And where was I going to sell?
And then, he just started opening up, and it was my turn.
Where were the polo shirts coming from?
What paperwork did he have?
And when was his next shipment going to arrive?
I was treading the fine line between asking enough questions to get what I needed and not enough for him to become suspicious, because what he didn't know is that I'm a counterfeit investigator, (Laughter) and after 20 minutes or so of checking over the product for the telltale signs of counterfeit production -- say, badly stitched labels or how the packaging had a huge brand logo stamped all over the front of it -- I was finally on my way out, but not before he insisted on walking down to the street with me and back to the station.
And the feeling after these meetings is always the same: my heart is beating like a drum, because you never know if they've actually bought your story, or they're going to start following you to see who you really are.
Relief only comes when you turn the first corner and glance behind, and they're not standing there.
But what our counterfeit polo shirt seller certainly didn't realize is that everything I'd seen and heard would result in a dawn raid on his house, him being woken out of bed by eight men on his doorstep and all his product seized.
But this would reveal that he was just a pawn at the end of a counterfeiting network spanning three continents, and he was just the first loose thread that I'd started to pull on in the hope that it would all unravel.
Why go through all that trouble?
Well, maybe counterfeiting is a victimless crime?
These big companies, they make enough money, so if anything, counterfeiting is just a free form of advertising, right?
And consumers believe just that -- that the buying and selling of fakes is not that big a deal.
But I'm here to tell you that that is just not true.
What the tourist on holiday doesn't see about those fake handbags is they may well have been stitched together by a child who was trafficked away from her family, and what the car repair shop owner doesn't realize about those fake brake pads is they may well be lining the pockets of an organized crime gang involved in drugs and prostitution.
And while those two things are horrible to think about, it gets much worse, because counterfeiting is even funding terrorism.
Let that sink in for a moment.
Terrorists are selling fakes to fund attacks, attacks in our cities that try to make victims of all of us.
You wouldn't buy a live scorpion, because there's a chance that it would sting you on the way home, but would you still buy a fake handbag if you knew the profits would enable someone to buy bullets that would kill you and other innocent people six months later?
Maybe not.
OK, time to come clean.
In my youth -- yeah, I might look like I'm still clinging on to it a bit -- I bought fake watches while on holiday in the Canary Islands.
But why do I tell you this?
Well, we've all done it, or we know someone that's done it.
And until this very moment, maybe you didn't think twice about it, and nor did I, until I answered a 20-word cryptic advert to become an intellectual property investigator.
It said "Full training given and some international travel."
Within a week, I was creating my first of many aliases, and in the 10 years since, I've investigated fake car parts, alloy wheels, fake pet grooming tools, fake bicycle parts, and, of course, the counterfeiter's favorite, fake luxury leather goods, clothing and shoes.
And what I've learned in the 10 years of investigating fakes is that once you start to scratch the surface, you find that they are rotten to the core, as are the people and organizations that are making money from them, because they are profiting on a massive, massive scale.
You can only make around a hundred to 200 percent selling drugs on the street.
You can make 2,000 percent selling fakes online with little of the same risks or penalties.
And this quick, easy money then goes on to fund the more serious types of crime, and it pays the way to making these organizations, these criminal organizations, look more legitimate.
So let me bring you in on a live case.
Earlier this year, a series of raids took place in one of my longest-running investigations.
Five warehouses were raided in Turkey, and over two million finished counterfeit clothing products were seized, and it took 16 trucks to take that all away.
But this gang had been clever.
They had gone to the lengths of creating their own fashion brands, complete with registered trademarks, and even having photo shoots on yachts in Italy.
And they would use these completely unheard-of and unsuspicious brand names as a way of shipping container loads of fakes to shell companies that they'd set up across Europe.
And documents found during those raids found that they'd been falsifying shipping documents so the customs officials would literally have no idea who had sent the products in the first place.
When police got access to just one bank account, they found nearly three million euros had been laundered out of Spain in less than two years, and just two days after those raids, that gang were trying to bribe a law firm to get their stock back.
Even now, we have no idea where all that money went, to who it went to, but you can bet it's never going to benefit the likes of you or me.
But these aren't just low-level street thugs.
They're business professionals, and they fly first class.
They trick legitimate businesses with convincing fake invoices and paperwork, so everything just seems real, and then they set up eBay and Amazon accounts just to compete with the people they've already sold fakes to.
But this isn't just happening online.
For a few years, I also used to attend automotive trade shows taking place in huge exhibition spaces, but away from the Ferraris and the Bentleys and the flashing lights, there'd be companies selling fakes: companies with a brochure on the counter and another one underneath, if you ask them the right questions.
And they would sell me fake car parts, faulty fake car parts that have been estimated to cause over 36,000 fatalities, deaths on our roads each year.
Counterfeiting is set to become a 2.3-trillion-dollar underground economy, and the damage that can be done with that kind of money, it's really frightening ...
because fakes fund terror.
Fake trainers on the streets of Paris, fake cigarettes in West Africa, and pirate music CDs in the USA have all gone on to fund trips to training camps, bought weapons and ammunition, or the ingredients for explosives.
In June 2014, the French security services stopped monitoring the communications of Said and Cherif Kouachi, the two brothers who had been on a terror watch list for three years.
But that summer, they were only picking up that Cherif was buying fake trainers from China, so it signaled a shift away from extremism into what was considered a low-level petty crime.
The threat had gone away.
Seven months later, the two brothers walked into the offices of Charlie Hebdo magazine and killed 12 people, wounded 11 more, with guns from the proceeds of those fakes.
So whatever you think, this isn't a faraway problem happening in China.
It's happening right here.
And Paris is not unique.
Ten years earlier, in 2004, 191 people lost their lives when a Madrid commuter train was bombed.
The attack had been partly funded by the sale of pirate music CDs in the US.
Two years prior to that, an Al Qaeda training manual recommended explicitly selling fakes as a good way of supporting terror cells.
But despite this, despite the evidence connecting terrorism and counterfeiting, we do go on buying them, increasing the demand to the point where there's even a store in Turkey called "I Love Genuine Fakes."
And you have tourists posing with photographs on TripAdvisor, giving it five-star reviews.
But would those same tourists have gone into a store called "I Love Genuine Fake Viagra Pills" or "I Genuinely Love Funding Terrorism"?
I doubt it.
Many of us think that we're completely helpless against organized crime and terrorism, that we can do nothing about the next attack, but I believe you can.
You can by becoming investigators, too.
The way we cripple these networks is to cut their funding, and that means cutting the demand and changing this idea that it's a victimless crime.
Let's all identify counterfeiters, and don't give them our money.
So here's a few tips from one investigator to another to get you started.
Number one: here's a typical online counterfeiter's website.
Note the URL.
If you're shopping for sunglasses or camera lenses, say, and you come across a website like medical-insurance-bankruptcy.com, start to get very suspicious.
(Laughter) Counterfeiters register expired domain names as a way of keeping up the old website's Google page ranking.
Number two: is the website screaming at you that everything is 100 percent genuine, but still giving you 75 percent off the latest collection?
Look for words like "master copy," "overruns," "straight from the factory."
They could write this all in Comic Sans, it's that much of a joke.
(Laughter) Number three: if you get as far as the checkout page, and you don't see "https" or a padlock symbol next to the URL, you should really start thinking about closing the tab, because these indicate active security measures that will keep your personal and credit card information safe.
OK, last one: go hunting for the "Contact Us" page.
If you can only find a generic webform, no company name, telephone number, email address, postal address -- that's it, case closed.
You found a counterfeiter.
Sadly, you're going to have to go back to Google and start your shopping search all over again, but you didn't get ripped off, so that's only a good thing.
As the world's most famous fictional detective would say, "Watson, the game is afoot."
Only this time, my investigator friends, the game is painfully real.
So the next time you're shopping online, or perhaps wherever it is, look closer, question a little bit deeper, and ask yourself -- before you hand over the cash or click "Buy," "Am I sure this is real?"
Tell your friend that used to buy counterfeit watches that he may just have brought the next attack one day closer.
And, if you see an Instagram advert for fakes, don't keep scrolling past, report it to the platform as a scam.
Let's shine a light on the dark forces of counterfeiting that are hiding in plain sight.
So please, spread the word and don't stop investigating.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It's hard to believe that it's less than a year since the extraordinary moment when the finance, the credit, which drives our economies froze.
A massive cardiac arrest.
The effect, the payback, perhaps, for years of vampire predators like Bernie Madoff, whom we saw earlier.
Abuse of steroids, binging and so on.
And it's only a few months since governments injected enormous sums of money to try and keep the whole system afloat.
And we're now in a very strange sort of twilight zone, where no one quite knows what's worked, or what doesn't.
We don't have any very clear maps, any compass to guide us.
We don't know which experts to believe anymore.
What I'm going to try and do is to give some pointers to what I think is the landscape on the other side of the crisis, what things we should be looking out for and how we can actually use the crisis.
There's a definition of leadership which says, "It's the ability to use the smallest possible crisis for the biggest possible effect."
And I want to talk about how we ensure that this crisis, which is by no means small, really is used to the full.
I want to start just by saying a bit about where I'm coming from.
I've got a very confused background which perhaps makes me appropriate for confused times.
I've got a Ph.D. in Telecoms, as you can see.
I trained briefly as a Buddhist monk under this guy.
I've been a civil servant, and I've been in charge of policy for this guy as well.
But what I want to talk about begins when I was at this city, this university, as a student.
And then as now, it was a beautiful place of balls and punts, beautiful people, many of whom took to heart Ronald Reagan's comment that, "even if they say hard work doesn't do you any harm, why risk it?"
But when I was here, a lot of my fellow teenagers were in a very different situation, leaving school at a time then of rapidly growing youth unemployment, and essentially hitting a brick wall in terms of their opportunities.
And I spent quite a lot of time with them rather than in punts.
And they were people who were not short of wit, or grace or energy, but they had no hope, no jobs, no prospects.
And when people aren't allowed to be useful, they soon think that they're useless.
And although that was great for the music business at the time, it wasn't much good for anything else.
And ever since then, I've wondered why it is that capitalism is so amazingly efficient at some things, but so inefficient at others, why it's so innovative in some ways and so un-innovative in others.
Now, since that time, we've actually been through an extraordinary boom, the longest boom ever in the history of this country.
Unprecedented wealth and prosperity, but that growth hasn't always delivered what we needed.
H.L. Mencken once said that, "to every complex problem, there is a simple solution and it's wrong."
But I'm not saying growth is wrong, but it's very striking that throughout the years of growth, many things didn't get better.
Rates of depression carried on up, right across the Western world.
If you look at America, the proportion of Americans with no one to talk to about important things went up from a tenth to a quarter.
We commuted longer to work, but as you can see from this graph, the longer you commute the less happy you're likely to be.
And it became ever clearer that economic growth doesn't automatically translate into social growth or human growth.
We're now at another moment when another wave of teenagers are entering a cruel job market.
There will be a million unemployed young people here by the end of the year, thousands losing their jobs everyday in America.
We've got to do whatever we can to help them, but we've also got to ask, I think, a more profound question of whether we use this crisis to jump forward to a different kind of economy that's more suited to human needs, to a better balance of economy and society.
And I think one of the lessons of history is that even the deepest crises can be moments of opportunity.
They bring ideas from the margins into the mainstream.
They often lead to the acceleration of much-needed reforms.
And you saw that in the '30s, when the Great Depression paved the way for Bretton Woods, welfare states and so on.
And I think you can see around us now, some of the green shoots of a very different kind of economy and capitalism which could grow.
You can see it in daily life.
When times are hard, people have to do things for themselves, and right across the world, Oxford, Omaha, Omsk, you can see an extraordinary explosion of urban farming, people taking over land, taking over roofs, turning barges into temporary farms.
And I'm a very small part of this.
I have 60,000 of these things in my garden.
A few of these. This is Atilla the hen.
And I'm a very small part of a very large movement, which for some people is about survival, but is also about values, about a different kind of economy, which isn't so much about consumption and credit, but about things which matter to us.
And everywhere too, you can see a proliferation of time banks and parallel currencies, people using smart technologies to link up all the resources freed up by the market -- people, buildings, land -- and linking them to whomever has got the most compelling needs.
There's a similar story, I think, for governments.
Ronald Reagan, again, said the two funniest sentences in the English language are, "I'm from the government. And I'm here to help."
But I think last year when governments did step in, people were quite glad that they were there, that they did act.
But now, a few months on, however good politicians are at swallowing frogs without pulling a face, as someone once put it, they can't hide their uncertainty.
Because it's already clear how much of the enormous amount of money they put into the economy, really went into fixing the past, bailing out the banks, the car companies, not preparing us for the future.
How much of the money is going into concrete and boosting consumption, not into solving the really profound problems we have to solve.
And everywhere, as people think about the unprecedented sums which are being spent of our money and our children's money, now, in the depth of this crisis, they're asking: Surely, we should be using this with a longer-term vision to accelerate the shift to a green economy, to prepare for aging, to deal with some of the inequalities which scar countries like this and the United States rather than just giving the money to the incumbents?
Surely, we should be giving the money to entrepreneurs, to civil society, for people able to create the new, not to the big, well-connected companies, big, clunky government programs.
And, after all this, as the great Chinese sage Lao Tzu said, "Governing a great country is like cooking a small fish.
Don't overdo it."
And I think more and more people are also asking: Why boost consumption, rather than change what we consume?
Like the mayor of São Paulo who's banned advertising billboards, or the many cities like San Francisco putting in infrastructures for electric cars.
You can see a bit of the same thing happening in the business world.
Some, I think some of the bankers who have appear to have learned nothing and forgotten nothing.
But ask yourselves: What will be the biggest sectors of the economy in 10, 20, 30 years time? It won't be the ones lining up for handouts, like cars and aerospace and so on.
The biggest sector, by far, will be health -- already 18 percent of the American economy, predicted to grow to 30, even 40 percent by mid-century.
Elder care, child care, already much bigger employers than cars.
Education: six, seven, eight percent of the economy and growing.
Environmental services, energy services, the myriad of green jobs, they're all pointing to a very different kind of economy which isn't just about products, but is using distributed networks, and it's founded above all on care, on relationships, on what people do to other people, often one to one, rather than simply selling them a product.
And I think that what connects the challenge for civil society, the challenge for governments and the challenge for business now is, in a way, a very simple one, but quite a difficult one.
We know our societies have to radically change.
We know we can't go back to where we were before the crisis.
But we also know it's only through experiment that we'll discover exactly how to run a low carbon city, how to care for a much older population, how to deal with drug addiction and so on.
And here's the problem.
In science, we do experiments systematically.
Our societies now spend two, three, four percent of GDP to invest systematically in new discovery, in science, in technology, to fuel the pipeline of brilliant inventions which illuminate gatherings like this.
It's not that our scientists are necessarily much smarter than they were a hundred years ago, maybe they are, but they have a hell of a lot more backing than they ever did.
And what's striking though, is that in society there's almost nothing comparable, no comparable investment, no systematic experiment, in the things capitalism isn't very good at, like compassion, or empathy, or relationships or care.
Now, I didn't really understand that until I met this guy who was then an 80-year-old, slightly shambolic man who lived on tomato soup and thought ironing was very overrated.
He had helped shape Britain's post-war institutions, its welfare state, its economy, but had sort of reinvented himself as a social entrepreneur, became an inventor of many, many different organizations.
Some famous ones like the Open University, which has 110,000 students, the University of the Third Age, which has nearly half a million older people teaching other older people, as well as strange things like DIY garages and language lines and schools for social entrepreneurs.
And he ended his life selling companies to venture capitalists.
He believed if you see a problem, you shouldn't tell someone to act, you should act on it yourself, and he lived long enough and saw enough of his ideas first scorned and then succeed that he said you should always take no as a question and not as an answer.
And his life was a systematic experiment to find better social answers, not from a theory, but from experiment, and experiment involving the people with the best intelligence on social needs, which were usually the people living with those needs.
And he believed we live with others, we share the world with others and therefore our innovation must be done with others too, not doing things at people, for them, and so on.
Now, what he did didn't used to have a name, but I think it's rapidly becoming quite mainstream.
It's what we do in the organization named after him where we try and invent, create, launch new ventures, whether it's schools, web companies, health organizations and so on.
And we find ourselves part of a very rapidly growing global movement of institutions working on social innovation, using ideas from design or technology or community organizing to develop the germs of a future world, but through practice and through demonstration and not through theory.
And they're spreading from Korea to Brazil to India to the USA and across Europe.
And they've been given new momentum by the crisis, by the need for better answers to joblessness, community breakdown and so on.
Some of the ideas are strange.
These are complaints choirs.
People come together to sing about the things that really bug them.
(Laughter) Others are much more pragmatic: health coaches, learning mentors, job clubs.
And some are quite structural, like social impact bonds where you raise money to invest in diverting teenagers from crime or helping old people keep out of hospital, and you get paid back according to how successful your projects are.
Now, the idea that all of this represents, I think, is rapidly becoming a common sense and part of how we respond to the crisis, recognizing the need to invest in innovation for social progress as well as technological progress.
There were big health innovation funds launched earlier this year in this country, as well as a public service innovation lab.
Across northern Europe, many governments now have innovation laboratories within them.
And just a few months ago, President Obama launched the Office of Social Innovation in the White House.
And what people are beginning to ask is: Surely, just as we invest in R and D, two, three, four percent, of our GDP, of our economy, what if we put, let's say, one percent of public spending into social innovation, into elder care, new kinds of education, new ways of helping the disabled?
Perhaps we'd achieve similar productivity gains in society to those we've had in the economy and in technology.
And if, a generation or two ago, the big challenges were ones like getting a man on the moon, perhaps the challenges we need to set ourselves now are ones like eliminating child malnutrition, stopping trafficking, or one, I think closer to home for America or Europe, why don't we set ourselves the goal of achieving a billion extra years of life for today's citizens.
Now those are all goals which could be achieved within a decade, but only with radical and systematic experiment, not just with technologies, but also with lifestyles and culture and policies and institutions too.
Now, I want to end by saying a little bit about what I think this means for capitalism.
I think what this is all about, this whole movement which is growing from the margins, remains quite small.
Nothing like the resources of a CERN or a DARPA or an IBM or a Dupont.
What it's telling us is that capitalism is going to become more social.
It's already immersed in social networks.
It will become more involved in social investment, and social care and in industries where the value comes from what you do with others, not just from what you sell to them, and from relationships as well as from consumption.
But interestingly too, it implies a future where society learns a few tricks from capitalism about how you embed the DNA of restless continual innovation into society, trying things out and then growing and scaling the ones that work.
Now, I think this future will be quite surprising to many people.
In recent years, a lot of intelligent people thought that capitalism had basically won.
History was over and society would inevitably have to take second place to economy.
But I've been struck with a parallel in how people often talk about capitalism today and how they talked about the monarchy 200 years ago, just after the French Revolution and the restoration of the monarchy in France.
Then, people said monarchy dominated everywhere because it was rooted in human nature.
We were naturally deferential. We needed hierarchy.
Just as today, the enthusiasts of unrestrained capitalism say it's rooted in human nature, only now it's individualism, inquisitiveness, and so on.
Then monarchy had seen off its big challenger, mass democracy, which was seen as a well-intentioned but doomed experiment, just as capitalism has seen off socialism.
Even Fidel Castro now says that the only thing worse than being exploited by multinational capitalism is not being exploited by multinational capitalism.
And whereas then monarchies, palaces and forts dominated every city skyline and looked permanent and confident, today it's the gleaming towers of the banks which dominate every big city.
I'm not suggesting the crowds are about to storm the barricades and string up every investment banker from the nearest lamppost, though that might be quite tempting.
But I do think we're on the verge of a period when, just as happened to the monarchy and, interestingly, the military too, the central position of finance capital is going to come to an end, and it's going to steadily move to the sides, the margins of our society, transformed from being a master into a servant, a servant to the productive economy and of human needs.
And as that happens, we will remember something very simple and obvious about capitalism, which is that, unlike what you read in economics textbooks, it's not a self-sufficient system.
It depends on other systems, on ecology, on family, on community, and if these aren't replenished, capitalism suffers too.
And our human nature isn't just selfish, it's also compassionate.
It's not just competitive, it's also caring.
Because of the depth of the crisis, I think we are at a moment of choice.
The crisis is almost certainly deepening around us.
It will be worse at the end of this year, quite possibly worse in a year's time than it is today.
But this is one of those very rare moments when we have to choose whether we're just pedaling furiously to get back to where we were a year or two ago, and a very narrow idea of what the economy is for, or whether this is a moment to jump ahead, to reboot and to do some of the things we probably should have been doing anyway.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A baby cursed at birth. A fierce battle of good and evil.
A true love awoken with a kiss.
Sleeping Beauty is one of the world’s favorite folktales.
But one of its most famous renditions tells the story without a single word.
Since premiering in 1890, "The Sleeping Beauty" has become one of the most frequently staged ballets in history.
So what makes this piece so beloved?
And what exactly does ballet bring to this— or any other story?
At the heart of ballet are dozens of gestures that dancers painstakingly perfect over thousands of hours of practice.
This unique set of gestures has been used for centuries, each movement rich with meaning and history.
But you don’t need to study them to understand ballet, any more than you need to study music to be moved by a song.
And just as composers combine notes and phrases to form pieces of music, choreographers string these gestures together with new movements to form expressive combinations.
Working alongside the orchestra’s live score, ballerinas precisely perform these combinations to convey narrative, emotion, and character.
In "The Sleeping Beauty’s" opening scene, a flurry of techniques depicts the fairy court bestowing gifts on baby Princess Aurora.
The Fairy of Generosity delicately walks “en pointe”— meaning on the tips of her toes— in step with the light plucking of violins.
The ballerina moves in perfect harmony with the music, even mimicing the violins’ trill with an elegant bourrée.
The Fairy of Temperance, bestowing the gift of strong will on Aurora, is choreographed as if shooting bolts of electricity from her fingers.
She bounds across the stage, spinning with quick chaînés before decisively jetéing.
Some movements are even more literal than this.
The evil fairy Carabosse curses the princess with a lethal “X,” and the benevolent Lilac Fairy counters that curse.
Of course, the relationship between music and movement isn’t always this straightforward.
While classical ballet gestures often respond to musical elements, the degree to which the dancers and orchestra align is another choreographic tool.
Some characters and scenes move in sync to create rhythmic clarity, while others deliberately diverge from the orchestra.
Dancers and musicians maintain this delicate balance throughout each performance, engaging in a live negotiation of speed and rhythm.
But prior to the performance, a ballet’s most important relationship is between the choreographer and the music.
Choreographer Marius Petipa and composer Piotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky worked together on every second of "The Sleeping Beauty."
This is particularly noticeable in Princess Aurora’s exuberant entrance on her 16th birthday.
Tchaikovsky’s enthusiastic music tumbles forward in fits and starts, even cutting short some musical phrases to capture her impatience.
Petipa choreographs Aurora bouncing back and forth with “pas de chat”— French for "cat steps"— as she waits for her party to begin.
Once the celebration starts, it’s up to the dancers to deliver on the physical spectacle of performing these gestures with grace.
Aurora has the hardest part of all: her famous Rose Adagio.
As four suitors vie for her hand, the Princess performs a dizzying array of balances, all en pointe.
She briefly takes each suitor’s hand, but then balances unassisted— a breath-taking display of physical strength and skill.
However, it’s not just technique that carries meaning, but also style and personality.
Like an actor delivering their lines, ballerinas can execute their movements to convey a wide range of emotion.
Aurora can be elegant and restrained, throwing her arms in independence from her suitors.
Or she can be coy and flirtatious, descending from en pointe with grace and knowing confidence.
"The Sleeping Beauty" offers a showcase for so much of what ballet can do.
Its graceful spectacle, dramatic physical vocabulary, and enchanting coordination of music and movement perfectly reflect the themes of this fantastical romance.
But ballet isn’t just for epic fairytales.
Ballets can be non-narrative emotional journeys, experimental deconstructions of form, or pure demonstrations of skill.
The artform is always experimenting with a centuries old set of rules, making it the perfect medium for stories old and new.
I'm a creative technologist and the focus of my work is on public installations.
One of my driving passions is this idea of exploring nature, and trying to find hidden data within nature.
It seems to me that there is this latent potential everywhere, all around us.
Everything gives out some kind of data, whether it's sound or smell or vibration.
Through my work, I've been trying to find ways to harness and unveil this.
And so this basically led me to a subject called cymatics.
Now, cymatics is the process of visualizing sound by basically vibrating a medium such as sand or water, as you can see there.
So, if we have a quick look at the history of cymatics beginning with the observations of resonance, by Da Vinci, Galileo, the English scientist Robert Hook and then Ernest Chladni.
He created an experiment using a metal plate, covering it with sand and then bowing it to create the Chladni patterns that you see here on the right.
Moving on from this, the next person to explore this field was a gentleman called Hans Jenny in the 1970s.
He actually coined the term cymatics.
Then bringing us into the present day is a fellow collaborator of mine and cymatics expert, John Stewart Reed.
He's kindly recreated for us the Chladni experiment.
What we can see here is the metal sheet, this time connected to a sound driver and being fed by a frequency generator.
As the frequencies increase, so do the complexities of the patterns that appear on the plate.
As you can see with your own eyes.
(Applause) So, what excites me about cymatics?
Well, for me cymatics is an almost magical tool.
It's like a looking glass into a hidden world.
Through the numerous ways that we can apply cymatics, we can actually start to unveil the substance of things not seen.
Devices like the cymascope, which you can see here, have been used to scientifically observe cymatic patterns.
And the list of scientific applications is growing every day.
For example, in oceanography, a lexicon of dolphin language is actually being created by basically visualizing the sonar beams that the dolphins emit.
And hopefully in the future we'll be able to gain some deeper understanding of how they communicate.
We can also use cymatics for healing and education.
This is an installation developed with school children, where their hands are tracked. It allows them to control and position cymatic patterns and the reflections that are caused by them.
We can also use cymatics as a beautiful natural art form.
This image here is created from a snippet of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony playing through a cymatic device.
So it kind of flips things on its head a little bit.
This is Pink Floyd's "Machine" playing in real time through the cymascope.
We can also use cymatics as a looking glass into nature.
And we can actually recreate the archetypal forms of nature.
So, for example, here on the left we can see a snowflake as it would appear in nature.
Then on the right we can see a cymatically created snowflake.
And here is a starfish and a cymatic starfish.
And there is thousands of these.
So what does this all mean?
Well, there is still a lot to explore in its early days. And there's not many people working in this field.
But consider for a moment that sound does have form.
We've seen that it can affect matter and cause form within matter.
Then sort of take a leap and think about the universe forming.
And think about the immense sound of the universe forming.
And if we kind of ponder on that, then perhaps cymatics had an influence on the formation of the universe itself.
And here is some eye candy for you, from a range of DIY scientists and artists from all over the globe.
Cymatics is accessible to everybody.
I want to urge everybody here to apply your passion, your knowledge and your skills to areas like cymatics.
I think collectively we can build a global community.
We can inspire each other.
And we can evolve this exploration of the substance of things not seen. Thank you.
(Applause)
"I'm 14, and I want to go home."
"My name is Beth, I'm here for you, tell me more."
"I've run away before, but I've never been involved with anything like this.
I think they put drugs in my liquor."
"It sounds like you feel you're not safe.
The fastest way for me to get help to you is for you to call 911."
"LOL, Beth.
If they hear me, they'll kill me.
They're about to send another man in to have sex with me, please hurry."
"OK, it sounds like you're in danger.
I can call 911 for you and send help.
You're being very brave."
"Thanks, Beth.
Tell the police to be careful, these men are armed."
I can share this story with you, because it was widely reported in news outlets throughout the country.
We did call 911.
The police rescued this girl, two other girls, and arrested three men, all at the Motel 6 in San Jose.
My name is Nancy "Beth" Lublin.
I'm the cofounder and CEO of Crisis Text Line, the free 24/7 service that helps people by text and Messenger, with mental health and behavioral health issues.
And when I go on the platform as a crisis counselor, I use the alias "Beth."
I happen to be the crisis counselor who took that conversation.
But this is what Crisis Text Line is.
It's strangers helping strangers in their darkest moments to stay alive, feel less alone, and to remind them how strong they are.
Crisis Text Line launched quietly in August 2013 in Chicago and in El Paso, and within four months, we were in all 274 area codes of the United States, because people used the service, had a great experience and shared it with their friends -- that's organic growth.
And in six and a half years, we've now processed about 150 million messages.
The people who use our free 24/7 service skew young, because it's text, so they skew young.
45 percent are under the age of 17.
Also poor, racially diverse.
17 percent identify as Hispanic, and 44 percent LGBTQ.
The top five issues that we see are relationships, depression, anxiety, self-harm and in approximately one in four conversations, suicidal ideation.
Everyone texting us is unhappy, yet we normally have about an 86 percent satisfaction rating from our texters.
What makes it so good?
The technology, the data and the people.
So, the technology.
It is not an app.
It's not something you have to download.
It's free, there's no complicated intake survey, so it's really user-friendly.
You just text us.
We use machine learning to stack-rank the queue based on severity.
Kind of like a hospital emergency room would take the gunshot wound before the kid with a sprained ankle.
We work the same way.
So we take the high-risk cases first.
So the person who swallowed a bottle of pills would come before someone else.
This is data science to save lives.
But it's humans who do the counseling.
We've trained over 28,000 volunteer crisis counselors who apply online, go through a background check and then about a 30-hour training.
And if they pass -- not everybody passes, there's only a 33 percent pass rate -- they can save lives from their couch.
It's a new gig economy for volunteerism, like Uber or Lyft for volunteerism.
And we also have full-time staff with a master's degree in a relevant field.
They're supervisors, and they watch every conversation and step in if needed.
Thanks to this technology and data and our volunteer labor model, we're able to reach tons of people in pain.
People who don't have access to other resources, like the gay teenager who can't share with his parents, because they keep telling him to pray the gay away.
Or the girl who can't sleep at 2am because she's got anxiety about finals and she doesn't want to disappoint people who love her.
So they text us.
And we love on them.
And we support them, and we remind them how strong they are.
And we work on a plan together to stay safe.
And we tell them that if this felt good, sharing with us -- and 68 percent of people say they've shared something with us they've never shared with another human, so if it feels good to share with us, maybe find just one other person in your life tomorrow to share with.
And after our conversation, they put that safety plan in place.
And maybe they go to sleep.
Or they journal.
Or they listen to BTS or Lizzo, or they write a letter to their sister or their boss or to themselves, to read in 12 months.
They stay safe.
Sometimes, people have the ideation, the plan, the means and the timing to hurt themselves or someone else, and we can't deescalate.
Like the man in Texas, five years ago on Christmas Eve, who told us he only felt pleasure when he inflicted pain and he wanted to kill women and was going to do it that very night.
In those imminent risk situations, we call 911.
And thank goodness for 911, because in that Texas incident, as reported in the news, they did send help, they sent the police to his home, and they found him with an arsenal of loaded weapons and on record as being in possession of a human foot.
Now, active rescues are less than one percent of our conversations.
But still, that's about 26 a day.
And six of those a week are for homicide.
Typically school shooters.
We have now completed more than 32,000 active rescues.
Our own data and external studies show that we're very good at saving lives, and at changing lives.
We use the data to make it possible for us to change systems.
So for example, we've learned the best way, the best language to risk-assess around suicidal ideation isn't to use the words, "Are you thinking of committing suicide?"
Instead, it's to use words like, "Are you thinking of death or dying?"
Or "Are you thinking about killing yourself?"
And now, we've shared that language with journalists, to adopt this.
We've shared that language with activists.
We're advising the National Emergency Number Association, the 911 Association, on best practices for first responders in suicide.
And we're working with the Veterans Administration to identify suicidal ideation and intent in veterans.
(Sighs) Pain isn't an American experience.
It's a human experience.
So we've been growing.
So far, we've been expanding one country at a time: Ireland, the UK, Canada -- which we did in both French and English.
And we could keep growing, one country at a time.
And it would take us decades to reach even just a third of the people in the world.
And that's just not acceptable.
We've already seen, since the start of COVID in early March, a 40 percent increase in our volume.
78 percent of our conversations include words like "freaked out," "scared," "panic."
People are worried about the COVID virus, and so they're nervous about symptoms and they're concerned for family on the front lines.
We're also seeing the impact of the quarantines themselves.
People are away from their routines, perhaps they're quarantined with abusive people.
So we've seen a 48 percent increase in sexual abuse, and a 74 percent increase in domestic violence.
One of the biggest impacts we've seen of the virus and the lockdowns is the financial stress.
We're seeing more people reach out with fears of bankruptcy, fears of homelessness and other financial ruin.
And right now, 32 percent of our texters identify as coming from household incomes under 20,000 dollars.
That's up from our typical 19 percent low income.
So we need to grow.
For months, we were planning on announcing that we were going to expand by language: Five languages in the next five years, covering 32 percent of the globe.
And then, COVID happened.
Things changed.
And now five years feels like a luxury.
So today, right now, we are committing to do it in half the time.
Five languages in two and a half years.
We're going to turn on Spanish everywhere, English everywhere, Portuguese everywhere, French everywhere, and the fifth language?
Arabic.
So we're going to bring our service to countries and populations that have limited mental health services and almost no data about what's going on.
These include immigrant populations -- who have phones.
And young people, who are often not counted in studies, but they have phones.
So we're going to shift to language, which makes the technology easier, because in addition to text, we're going to be using WhatsApp and Messenger.
And global expansion helps us with middle-of-the-night capacity, because we'll have time-zone coverage.
So think about it, this will be strangers helping strangers around the world.
Like a giant global love machine.
And the fact that the TED community has supported our audacious dream is just deeply, deeply meaningful, to me and to everybody on our team.
And the best way for us to show our gratitude is to just let you know that we are ready and we are fired up.
And we're going to use this support to impact millions of lives around the world.
Times are hard.
And it's confusing, and it's depressing, and sometimes, we all feel alone, especially in isolation.
But no matter what age, no matter what your situation is or where you live, we'll be at your fingertips, in your pocket.
I've been thinking a lot these last few weeks about that trafficked girl who I connected with.
And I hope she's somewhere safe.
I don't know ...
I don't know how she's quarantined or who she's with, but I hope she's safe.
And I don't know, last year, how she had our number, or even how she had access to a phone to reach out to us.
I never asked her.
Because it didn't matter.
What mattered was that she could contact us, that she did have it, and we got help to her quickly.
And that's the goal, it's to make it easier for people to get help than avoid getting help.
That in moments of hardship, of danger, of physical distance, that nobody is ever alone.
That thanks to Crisis Text Line, none of us is ever actually alone.
[Support this initiative at AudaciousProject.org]
I'm extremely excited to be given the opportunity to come and speak to you today about what I consider to be the biggest stunt on Earth.
Or perhaps not quite on Earth.
A parachute jump from the very edge of space.
More about that a bit later on.
What I'd like to do first is take you through a very brief helicopter ride of stunts and the stunts industry in the movies and in television, and show you how technology has started to interface with the physical skills of the stunt performer in a way that makes the stunts bigger and actually makes them safer than they've ever been before.
I've been a professional stunt man for 13 years.
I'm a stunt coordinator. And as well as perform stunts I often design them.
During that time, health and safety has become everything about my job.
It's critical now that when a car crash happens it isn't just the stunt person we make safe, it's the crew.
We can't be killing camera men. We can't be killing stunt men.
We can't be killing anybody or hurting anybody on set, or any passerby. So, safety is everything.
But it wasn't always that way.
In the old days of the silent movies -- Harold Lloyd here, hanging famously from the clock hands -- a lot of these guys did their own stunts. They were quite remarkable.
They had no safety, no real technology.
What safety they had was very scant.
This is the first stunt woman, Rosie Venger, an amazing woman.
You can see from the slide, very very strong.
She really paved the way at a time when nobody was doing stunts, let alone women.
My favorite and a real hero of mine is Yakima Canutt.
Yakima Canutt really formed the stunt fight.
He worked with John Wayne and most of those old punch-ups you see in the Westerns. Yakima was either there or he stunt coordinated.
This is a screen capture from "Stagecoach," where Yakima Canutt is doing one of the most dangerous stunts I've ever seen.
There is no safety, no back support, no pads, no crash mats, no sand pits in the ground.
That's one of the most dangerous horse stunts, certainly.
Talking of dangerous stunts and bringing things slightly up to date, some of the most dangerous stunts we do as stunt people are fire stunts.
We couldn't do them without technology.
These are particularly dangerous because there is no mask on my face.
They were done for a photo shoot. One for the Sun newspaper, one for FHM magazine.
Highly dangerous, but also you'll notice it doesn't look as though I'm wearing anything underneath the suit.
The fire suits of old, the bulky suits, the thick woolen suits, have been replaced with modern materials like Nomex or, more recently, Carbonex -- fantastic materials that enable us as stunt professionals to burn for longer, look more spectacular, and in pure safety.
Here's a bit more.
There's a guy with a flame thrower there, giving me what for.
One of the things that a stuntman often does, and you'll see it every time in the big movies, is be blown through the air.
Well, we used to use trampettes. In the old days, that's all they had.
And that's a ramp. Spring off the thing and fly through the air, and hopefully you make it look good.
Now we've got technology. This thing is called an air ram.
It's a frightening piece of equipment for the novice stunt performer, because it will break your legs very, very quickly if you land on it wrong.
Having said that, it works with compressed nitrogen.
And that's in the up position. When you step on it, either by remote control or with the pressure of your foot, it will fire you, depending on the gas pressure, anything from five feet to 30 feet.
I could, quite literally, fire myself into the gallery.
Which I'm sure you wouldn't want.
Not today.
Car stunts are another area where technology and engineering advances have made life easier for us, and safer.
We can do bigger car stunts than ever before now.
Being run over is never easy.
That's an old-fashioned, hard, gritty, physical stunt.
But we have padding, and fantastic shock-absorbing things like Sorbothane -- the materials that help us, when we're hit like this, not to hurt ourselves too much.
The picture in the bottom right-hand corner there is of some crash test dummy work that I was doing.
Showing how stunts work in different areas, really.
And testing breakaway signpost pillars.
A company makes a Lattix pillar, which is a network, a lattice-type pillar that collapses when it's hit.
The car on the left drove into the steel pillar.
And you can't see it from there, but the engine was in the driver's lap.
They did it by remote control.
I drove the other one at 60 miles an hour, exactly the same speed, and clearly walked away from it.
Rolling a car over is another area where we use technology.
We used to have to drive up a ramp, and we still do sometimes.
But now we have a compressed nitrogen cannon.
You can just see, underneath the car, there is a black rod on the floor by the wheel of the other car.
That's the piston that was fired out of the floor.
We can flip lorries, coaches, buses, anything over with a nitrogen cannon with enough power. (Laughs) It's a great job, really. (Laughter) It's such fun!
You should hear some of the phone conversations that I have with people on my Bluetooth in the shop.
"Well, we can flip the bus over, we can have it burst into flames, and how about someone, you know, big explosion."
And people are looking like this ...
(Laughs) I sort of forget how bizarre some of those conversations are.
The next thing that I'd like to show you is something that Dunlop asked me to do earlier this year with our Channel Five's "Fifth Gear Show."
A loop-the-loop, biggest in the world.
Only one person had ever done it before.
Now, the stuntman solution to this in the old days would be, "Let's hit this as fast as possible. 60 miles an hour.
Let's just go for it. Foot flat to the floor."
Well, you'd die if you did that.
We went to Cambridge University, the other university, and spoke to a Doctor of Mechanical Engineering there, a physicist who taught us that it had to be 37 miles an hour.
Even then, I caught seven G and lost a bit of consciousness on the way in.
That's a long way to fall, if you get it wrong. That was just about right.
So again, science helps us, and with the engineering too -- the modifications to the car and the wheel.
High falls, they're old fashioned stunts.
What's interesting about high falls is that although we use airbags, and some airbags are quite advanced, they're designed so you don't slip off the side like you used to, if you land a bit wrong. So, they're a much safer proposition.
Just basically though, it is a basic piece of equipment.
It's a bouncy castle with slats in the side to allow the air to escape.
That's all it is, a bouncy castle.
That's the only reason we do it. See, it's all fun, this job.
What's interesting is we still use cardboard boxes.
They used to use cardboard boxes years ago and we still use them.
And that's interesting because they are almost retrospective.
They're great for catching you, up to certain heights.
And on the other side of the fence, that physical art, the physical performance of the stuntman, has interfaced with the very highest technology in I.T. and in software.
Not the cardboard box, but the green screen.
This is a shot of "Terminator," the movie.
Two stunt guys doing what I consider to be a rather benign stunt.
It's 30 feet. It's water. It's very simple.
With the green screen we can put any background in the world on it, moving or still, and I can assure you, nowadays you can't see the joint.
This is a parachutist with another parachutist doing exactly the same thing.
Completely in the safety of a studio, and yet with the green screen we can have some moving image that a skydiver took, and put in the sky moving and the clouds whizzing by.
Decelerator rigs and wires, we use them a lot.
We fly people on wires, like this.
This guy is not skydiving. He's being flown like a kite, or moved around like a kite.
And this is a Guinness World Record attempt.
They asked me to open their 50th anniversary show in 2004.
And again, technology meant that I could do the fastest abseil over 100 meters, and stop within a couple of feet of the ground without melting the rope with the friction, because of the alloys I used in the descender device.
And that's Centre Point in London.
We brought Oxford Street and Tottenham Court Road to a standstill.
Helicopter stunts are always fun, hanging out of them, whatever.
And aerial stunts. No aerial stunt would be the same without skydiving.
Which brings us quite nicely to why I'm really here today: Project Space Jump.
In 1960, Joseph Kittenger of the United States Air Force did the most spectacular thing.
He did a jump from 100,000 feet, 102,000 to be precise, and he did it to test high altitude systems for military pilots in the new range of aircraft that were going up to 80,000 feet or so.
And I'd just like to show you a little footage of what he did back then.
And just how brave he was in 1960, bear in mind.
Project Excelsior, it was called.
There were three jumps.
They first dropped some dummies.
So that's the balloon, big gas balloon.
It's that shape because the helium has to expand.
My balloon will expand to 500 times and look like a big pumpkin when it's at the top.
These are the dummies being dropped from 100,000 feet, and there is the camera that's strapped to them.
You can clearly see the curvature of the Earth at that kind of altitude.
And I'm planning to go from 120,000 feet, which is about 22 miles.
You're in a near vacuum in that environment, which is in minus 50 degrees.
So it's an extremely hostile place to be.
This is Joe Kittenger himself.
Bear in mind, ladies and gents, this was 1960.
He didn't know if he would live or die. This is an extremely brave man.
I spoke with him on the phone a few months ago.
He's a very humble and wonderful human being.
He sent me an email, saying, "If you get this thing off the ground I wish you all the best." And he signed it, "Happy landings," which I thought was quite lovely.
He's in his 80s and he lives in Florida. He's a tremendous guy.
This is him in a pressure suit.
Now one of the challenges of going up to altitude is when you get to 30,000 feet -- it's great, isn't it? -- When you get to 30,000 feet you can really only use oxygen.
Above 30,000 feet up to nearly 50,000 feet, you need pressure breathing, which is where you're wearing a G suit.
This is him in his old rock-and-roll jeans there, pushing him in, those turned up jeans.
You need a pressure suit.
You need a pressure breathing system with a G suit that squeezes you, that helps you to breathe in and helps you to exhale.
Above 50,000 feet you need a space suit, a pressure suit.
Certainly at 100,000 feet no aircraft will fly.
Not even a jet engine.
It needs to be rocket-powered or one of these things, a great big gas balloon.
It took me a while; it took me years to find the right balloon team to build the balloon that would do this job.
I've found that team in America now.
And it's made of polyethylene, so it's very thin.
We will have two balloons for each of my test jumps, and two balloons for the main jump, because they notoriously tear on takeoff.
They're just so, so delicate.
This is the step off. He's written on that thing, "The highest step in the world."
And what must that feel like?
I'm excited and I'm scared, both at the same time in equal measures.
And this is the camera that he had on him as he tumbled before his drogue chute opened to stabilize him.
A drogue chute is just a smaller chute which helps to keep your face down.
You can just see them there, popping open.
Those are the drogue chutes. He had three of them.
I did quite a lot of research.
And you'll see in a second there, he comes back down to the floor.
Now just to give you some perspective of this balloon, the little black dots are people.
It's hundreds of feet high. It's enormous.
That's in New Mexico.
That's the U.S. Air Force Museum.
And they've made a dummy of him. That's exactly what it looked like.
My gondola will be more simple than that.
It's a three sided box, basically.
So I've had to do quite a lot of training.
This is Morocco last year in the Atlas mountains, training in preparation for some high altitude jumps.
This is what the view is going to be like at 90,000 feet for me.
Now you may think this is just a thrill-seeking trip, a pleasure ride, just the world's biggest stunt.
Well there's a little bit more to it than that.
Trying to find a space suit to do this has led me to an area of technology that I never really expected when I set about doing this.
I contacted a company in the States who make suits for NASA.
That's a current suit. This was me last year with their chief engineer.
That suit would cost me about a million and a half dollars.
And it weighs 300 pounds and you can't skydive in it.
So I've been stuck. For the past 15 years I've been trying to find a space suit that would do this job, or someone that will make one.
Something revolutionary happened a little while ago, at the same facility.
That's the prototype of the parachute. I've now had them custom make one, the only one of its kind in the world. And that's the only suit of its kind in the world.
It was made by a Russian that's designed most of the suits of the past 18 years for the Soviets.
He left the company because he saw, as some other people in the space suit industry, an emerging market for space suits for space tourists.
You know if you are in an aircraft at 30,000 feet and the cabin depressurizes, you can have oxygen.
If you're at 100,000 feet you die.
In six seconds you've lost consciousness. In 10 seconds you're dead.
Your blood tries to boil. It's called vaporization.
The body swells up. It's awful.
And so we expect -- it's not much fun.
We expect, and others expect, that perhaps the FAA, the CAA might say, "You need to put someone in a suit that's not inflated, that's connected to the aircraft."
Then they're comfortable, they have good vision, like this great big visor.
And then if the cabin depressurizes while the aircraft is coming back down, in whatever emergency measures, everyone is okay.
I would like to bring Costa on, if he's here, to show you the only one of its kind in the world.
I was going to wear it, but I thought I'd get Costa to do it, my lovely assistant.
Thank you. He's very hot. Thank you, Costa.
This is the communication headset you'll see on lots of space suits.
It's a two-layer suit. NASA suits have got 13 layers.
This is a very lightweight suit. It weighs about 15 pounds.
It's next to nothing. Especially designed for me.
It's a working prototype. I will use it for all the jumps.
Would you just give us a little twirl, please, Costa?
Thank you very much.
And it doesn't look far different when it's inflated, as you can see from the picture down there.
I've even skydived in it in a wind tunnel, which means that I can practice everything I need to practice, in safety, before I ever jump out of anything. Thanks very much, Costa.
(Applause) Ladies and gentlemen, that's just about it from me.
The status of my mission at the moment is it still needs a major sponsor.
I'm confident that we'll find one.
I think it's a great challenge.
And I hope that you will agree with me, it is the greatest stunt on Earth.
Thank you very much for your time.
(Applause)
Australians call them “runners." The British know them as “trainers."
Americans refer to them as “tennis shoes” or “sneakers."
Whatever you call them, these rubber-soled, casual shoes are worn by billions of people around the world.
Originally invented in the late 19th century, these simple canvas and rubber creations have changed a lot since they first hit the pavement.
Today, sneaker consumption is at an all-time high.
No country buys more sneakers than the United States, where people purchase 3 pairs a year on average.
To meet this demand, roughly 23 billion shoes are produced each year, mostly in factories across China and Southeast Asia.
But making shoes has become more complicated, more labor-intensive, and in some ways, more dangerous, for the workers involved and for our planet.
Shoe manufacturing accounts for roughly one-fifth of the fashion industry’s carbon emissions.
Sneakers alone generate 313 million metric tons of carbon dioxide every year, which is equivalent to the annual emissions of 66 million cars.
To better understand your shoe’s carbon footprint, let’s dive into the anatomy of a sneaker.
For starters, the heel, insole, midsole, and upper layer are usually made from synthetic textiles like polyester, nylon, latex, and polyurethane.
Mining the fossil fuels that make up these materials emits tons of greenhouse gases.
And processing those raw ingredients into synthetic textiles also uses a lot of energy, further compounding that pollution.
Some sneaker tops are made from natural sources like leather, but tanning this material relies on chromium; a carcinogenic chemical that can damage freshwater ecosystems.
The outer soles of most shoes are made of rubber that’s gone through a process called vulcanization.
This technique adds sulfur to superheated raw rubber to create a material that’s both elastic and sturdy.
Until recently, sneakers used natural rubber for this process.
But today, most outer soles are made with a synthetic blend of natural rubber and byproducts from coal and oil.
Producing these materials accounts for 20% of a sneaker’s carbon footprint.
But more than two-thirds of the shoe’s carbon impact comes from the next step: manufacturing.
A typical sneaker is comprised of 65 discrete parts, each of which is produced by specialized machinery.
This means it’s cheaper for factories to mass-produce each piece separately rather than manufacturing every part under one roof.
But the transportation required to ship these pieces to one assembly plant emits even more CO2.
Once the components arrive at the assembly line, they undergo cutting, pouring, melting, baking, cooling, and gluing, before the final products can be stitched together.
The assembly of a typical sneaker requires more than 360 steps, and accounts for the remaining 20% of a sneaker’s environmental impact.
The dispersion of factories fuels another problem as well: labor abuse.
Most brands don’t own or operate their factories, so the plants they work with are in countries with little to no worker protection laws.
As a result, many laborers earn below the living wage, and are exposed to harmful chemicals, like toxic glue fumes.
When manufacturing is complete, the shoes are packaged and transported to stores around the globe.
For many, these shoes could last years.
But for someone running 20 miles a week, a pair of running shoes will start wearing out after roughly 6 months.
Since the shoes are made of so many different materials, they’re almost impossible to break down into recyclable components.
20% of these shoes are incinerated, while the rest are tossed into landfills where they can take up to 1,000 years to degrade.
So, how can we balance our love of sneakers with the need for sustainability?
First, designers should streamline design elements and focus on eco-friendly materials.
Factories need to develop energy efficient manufacturing processes that consolidate steps and sneaker parts.
And consumers should support companies using clean energy and ethical manufacturing processes.
We can also buy fewer shoes, wear them for longer, and donate those we no longer need.
So no matter what your style, we can all take steps towards a sustainable future.
Helen Walters: So, Chris, who's up first?
Chris Anderson: Well, we have a man who's worried about pandemics pretty much his whole life.
He played an absolutely key role, more than 40 years ago, in helping the world get rid of the scourge of smallpox.
And in 2006, he came to TED to warn the world of the dire risk of a global pandemic, and what we might do about it.
So please welcome here Dr. Larry Brilliant.
Larry, so good to see you.
Larry Brilliant: Thank you, nice to see you.
CA: Larry, in that talk, you showed a video clip that was a simulation of what a pandemic might look like.
I would like to play it -- this gave me chills.
Larry Brilliant (TED2006): Let me show you a simulation of what a pandemic looks like, so we know what we're talking about.
Let's assume, for example, that the first case occurs in South Asia.
It initially goes quite slowly, you get two or three discrete locations.
Then there will be secondary outbreaks.
And the disease will spread from country to country so fast that you won't know what hit you.
Within three weeks, it will be everywhere in the world.
Now if we had an undo button, and we could go back and isolate it and grab it when it first started, if we could find it early and we had early detection and early response, and we could put each one of those viruses in jail, that's the only way to deal with something like a pandemic.
CA: Larry, that phrase you mentioned there, "early detection," "early response," that was a key theme of that talk, you made us all repeat it several times.
Is that still the key to preventing a pandemic?
LB: Oh, surely.
You know, when you have a pandemic, something moving at exponential speed, if you miss the first two weeks, if you're late the first two weeks, it's not the deaths and the illness from the first two weeks you lose, it's the two weeks at the peak.
Those are prevented if you act early.
Early response is critical, early detection is a condition precedent.
CA: And how would you grade the world on its early detection, early response to COVID-19?
LB: Of course, you gave me this question earlier, so I've been thinking a lot about it.
I think I would go through the countries, and I've actually made a list.
I think the island republics of Taiwan, Iceland and certainly New Zealand would get an A.
The island republic of the UK and the United States -- which is not an island, no matter how much we may think we are -- would get a failing grade.
I'd give a B to South Korea and to Germany.
And in between ...
The world as a whole is faltering.
We shouldn't be proud of what's happening right now.
CA: I mean, we got the detection pretty early, or at least some doctors in China got the detection pretty early.
LB: Earlier than the 2002 SARS, which took six months.
This took about six weeks.
And detection means not only finding it, but knowing what it is.
So I would give us a pretty good score on that.
The transparency, the communication -- those are other issues.
CA: So what was the key mistake that you think the countries you gave an F to made?
LB: I think fear, political incompetence, interference, not taking it seriously soon enough -- it's pretty human.
I think throughout history, pretty much every pandemic is first viewed with denial and doubt.
But those countries that acted quickly, and even those who started slow, like South Korea, they could still make up for it, and they did really well.
We've had two months that we've lost.
We've given a virus that moves exponentially a two-month head start.
That's not a good idea, Chris.
CA: No, indeed.
I mean, there's so much puzzling information still out there about this virus.
What do you think the scientific consensus is going to likely end up being on, like, the two key numbers of its infectiousness and its fatality rate?
LB: So I think the kind of equation to keep in mind is that the virus moves dependent on three major issues.
One is the R0, the first number of secondary cases that there are when the virus emerges.
In this case, people talk about it being 2.2, 2.4.
But a really important paper three weeks ago, in the "Emerging Infectious Diseases" journal came out, suggesting that looking back on the Wuhan data, it's really 5.7.
So for argument's sake, let's say that the virus is moving at exponential speed and the exponent is somewhere between 2.2 and 5.7.
The other two factors that matter are the incubation period or the generation time.
The longer that is, the slower the pandemic appears to us.
When it's really short, like six days, it moves like lightning.
And then the last, and the most important -- and it's often overlooked -- is the density of susceptibles.
This is a novel virus, so we want to know how many customers could it potentially have.
And as it's novel, that's eight billion of us.
The world is facing a virus that looks at all of us like equally susceptible.
Doesn't matter our color, our race, or how wealthy we are.
CA: I mean, none of the numbers that you've mentioned so far are in themselves different from any other infections in recent years.
What is the combination that has made this so deadly?
LB: Well, it is exactly the combination of the short incubation period and the high transmissibility.
But you know, everybody on this call has known somebody who has the disease.
Sadly, many have lost a loved one.
This is a terrible disease when it is serious.
And I get calls from doctors in emergency rooms and treating people in ICUs all over the world, and they all say the same thing: "How do I choose who is going to live and who is going to die?
I have so few tools to deal with."
It's a terrifying disease, to die alone with a ventilator in your lungs, and it's a disease that affects all of our organs.
It's a respiratory disease -- perhaps misleading.
Makes you think of a flu.
But so many of the patients have blood in their urine from kidney disease, they have gastroenteritis, they certainly have heart failure very often, we know that it affects taste and smell, the olfactory nerves, we know, of course, about the lung.
The question I have: is there any organ that it does not affect?
And in that sense, it reminds me all too much of smallpox.
CA: So we're in a mess.
What's the way forward from here?
LB: Well, the way forward is still the same.
Rapid detection, rapid response.
Finding every case, and then figuring out all the contacts.
We've got great new technology for contact tracing, we've got amazing scientists working at the speed of light to give us test kits and antivirals and vaccines.
We need to slow down, the Buddhists say slow down time so that you can put your heart, your soul, into that space.
We need to slow down the speed of this virus, which is why we do social distancing.
Just to be clear -- flattening the curve, social distancing, it doesn't change the absolute number of cases, but it changes what could be a Mount Fuji-like peak into a pulse, and then we won't also lose people because of competition for hospital beds, people who have heart attacks, need chemotherapy, difficult births, can get into the hospital, and we can use the scarce resources we have, especially in the developing world, to treat people.
So slow down, slow down the speed of the epidemic, and then in the troughs, in between waves, jump on, double down, step on it, and find every case, trace every contact, test every case, and then only quarantine the ones who need to be quarantined, and do that until we have a vaccine.
CA: So it sounds like we have to get past the stage of just mitigation, where we're just trying to take a general shutdown, to the point where we can start identifying individual cases again and contact-trace for them and treat them separately.
I mean, to do that, that seems like it's going to take a step up of coordination, ambition, organization, investment, that we're not really seeing the signs of yet in some countries.
Can we do this, how can we do this?
LB: Oh, of course we can do this.
I mean, Taiwan did it so beautifully, Iceland did it so beautifully, Germany, all with different strategies, South Korea.
It really requires competent governance, a sense of seriousness, and listening to the scientists, not the politicians following the virus.
Of course we can do this.
Let me remind everybody -- this is not the zombie apocalypse, it's not a mass extinction event.
You know, 98, 99 percent of us are going to get out of this alive.
We need to deal with it the way we know we can, and we need to be the best version of ourselves.
Both sitting at home as well as in science, and certainly in leadership.
CA: And might there be even worse pathogens out there in the future?
Like, can you picture or describe an even worse combination of those numbers that we should start to get ready for?
LB: Well, smallpox had an R0 of 3.5 to 4.5, so that's probably about what I think this COVID will be.
But it killed a third of the people.
But we had a vaccine.
So those are the different sets that you have.
But what I'm mostly worried about, and the reason that we made "Contagion" and that was a fictional virus -- I repeat, for those of you watching, that's fiction.
We created a virus that killed a lot more than this one did.
CA: You're talking about the movie "Contagion" that's been trending on Netflix.
And you were an advisor for.
LB: Absolutely, that's right.
But we made that movie deliberately to show what a real pandemic looked like, but we did choose a pretty awful virus.
And the reason we showed it like that, going from a bat to an apple, to a pig, to a cook, to Gwyneth Paltrow, was because that is in nature what we call spillover, as zoonotic diseases, diseases of animals, spill over to human beings.
And if I look backwards three decades or forward three decades -- looking backward three decades, Ebola, SARS, Zika, swine flu, bird flu, West Nile, we can begin almost a catechism and listen to all the cacophony of these names.
But there were 30 to 50 novel viruses that jumped into human beings.
And I'm afraid, looking forward, we are in the age of pandemics, we have to behave like that, we need to practice One Health, we need to understand that we're living in the same world as animals, the environment, and us, and we get rid of this fiction that we are some kind of special species.
To the virus, we're not.
CA: Mmm.
You mentioned vaccines, though.
Do you see any accelerated path to a vaccine?
LB: I do.
I'm actually excited to see that we're doing something that we only get to think of in computer science, which is we're changing what should have always been, or has always been, rather, multiple sequential processes.
Do safety testing, then you test for effectiveness, then for efficiency.
And then you manufacture.
We're doing all three or four of those steps, instead of doing it in sequence, we're doing in parallel.
Bill Gates has said he's going to build seven vaccine production lines in the United States, and start preparing for production, not knowing what the end vaccine is going to be.
We're simultaneously doing safety tests and efficacy tests.
I think the NIH has jumped up.
I'm very thrilled to see that.
CA: And how does that translate into a likely time line, do you think?
A year, 18 months, is that possible?
LB: You know, Tony Fauci is our guru in this, and he said 12 to 18 months.
I think that we will do faster than that in the initial vaccine.
But you may have heard that this virus may not give us the long-term immunity -- that something like smallpox would do.
So we're trying to make vaccines where we add adjuvants that actually make the vaccine create better immunity than the disease, so that we can confer immunity for many years.
That's going to take a little longer.
CA: Last question, Larry.
Back in 2006, as a winner of the TED Prize, we granted you a wish, and you wished the world would create this pandemic preparedness system that would prevent something like this happening.
I feel like we, the world, let you down.
If you were to make another wish now, what would it be?
LB: Well, I don't think we're let down in terms of speed of detection.
I'm actually pretty pleased.
When we met in 2006, the average one of these viruses leaping from an animal to a human, it took us six months to find that -- like the first Ebola, for example.
We're now finding the first cases in two weeks.
I'm not unhappy about that, I'd like to push it down to a single incubation period.
It's a bigger issue for me.
What I found is that in the Smallpox Eradication Programme people of all colors, all religions, all races, so many countries, came together.
And it took working as a global community to conquer a global pandemic.
Now, I feel that we have become victims of centrifugal forces.
We're in our nationalistic kind of barricades.
We will not be able to conquer a pandemic unless we believe we're all in it together.
This is not some Age of Aquarius, or Kumbaya statement, this is what a pandemic forces us to realize.
We are all in it together, we need a global solution to a global problem.
Anything less than that is unthinkable.
CA: Larry Brilliant, thank you so very much.
LB: Thank you, Chris.
In 1905, psychologists Alfred Binet and Théodore Simon designed a test for children who were struggling in school in France.
Designed to determine which children required individualized attention, their method formed the basis of the IQ test.
Beginning in the late 19th century, researchers hypothesized that cognitive abilities like verbal reasoning, working memory, and visual-spatial skills reflected an underlying general intelligence, or g factor.
Simon and Binet designed a battery of tests to measure each of these abilities and combine the results into a single score.
Questions were adjusted for each age group, and a child’s score reflected how they performed relative to others their age.
Dividing someone’s score by their age and multiplying the result by 100 yielded the intelligence quotient, or IQ.
Today, a score of 100 represents the average of a sample population, with 68% of the population scoring within 15 points of 100.
Simon and Binet thought the skills their test assessed would reflect general intelligence.
But both then and now, there’s no single agreed upon definition of general intelligence.
And that left the door open for people to use the test in service of their own preconceived assumptions about intelligence.
What started as a way to identify those who needed academic help quickly became used to sort people in other ways, often in service of deeply flawed ideologies.
One of the first large-scale implementations occurred in the United States during WWI, when the military used an IQ test to sort recruits and screen them for officer training.
At that time, many people believed in eugenics, the idea that desirable and undesirable genetic traits could and should be controlled in humans through selective breeding.
There were many problems with this line of thinking, among them the idea that intelligence was not only fixed and inherited, but also linked to a person’s race.
Under the influence of eugenics, scientists used the results of the military initiative to make erroneous claims that certain racial groups were intellectually superior to others.
Without taking into account that many of the recruits tested were new immigrants to the United States who lacked formal education or English language exposure, they created an erroneous intelligence hierarchy of ethnic groups.
The intersection of eugenics and IQ testing influenced not only science, but policy as well.
In 1924, the state of Virginia created policy allowing for the forced sterilization of people with low IQ scores— a decision the United States Supreme Court upheld.
In Nazi Germany, the government authorized the murder of children based on low IQ.
Following the Holocaust and the Civil Rights Movement, the discriminatory uses of IQ tests were challenged on both moral and scientific grounds.
Scientists began to gather evidence of environmental impacts on IQ.
For example, as IQ tests were periodically recalibrated over the 20th century, new generations scored consistently higher on old tests than each previous generation.
This phenomenon, known as the Flynn Effect, happened much too fast to be caused by inherited evolutionary traits.
Instead, the cause was likely environmental— improved education, better healthcare, and better nutrition.
In the mid-twentieth century, psychologists also attempted to use IQ tests to evaluate things other than general intelligence, particularly schizophrenia, depression, and other psychiatric conditions.
These diagnoses relied in part on the clinical judgment of the evaluators, and used a subset of the tests used to determine IQ— a practice later research found does not yield clinically useful information.
Today, IQ tests employ many similar design elements and types of questions as the early tests, though we have better techniques for identifying potential bias in the test.
They’re no longer used to diagnose psychiatric conditions.
But a similarly problematic practice using subtest scores is still sometimes used to diagnose learning disabilities, against the advice of many experts.
Psychologists around the world still use IQ tests to identify intellectual disability, and the results can be used to determine appropriate educational support, job training, and assisted living.
IQ test results have been used to justify horrific policies and scientifically baseless ideologies.
That doesn’t mean the test itself is worthless— in fact, it does a good job of measuring the reasoning and problem-solving skills it sets out to.
But that isn’t the same thing as measuring a person’s potential.
Though there are many complicated political, historical, scientific, and cultural issues wrapped up in IQ testing, more and more researchers agree on this point, and reject the notion that individuals can be categorized by a single numerical score.
In early 1828, Sojourner Truth approached the Grand Jury of Kingston, New York.
She had no experience with the legal system, no money, and no power in the eyes of the court.
Ignoring the jury’s scorn, Truth said she was there to fight for custody of her five-year-old son Peter, who’d been illegally sold to an enslaver in Alabama.
As the trial played out over the next several months, Truth raised funds, strategized with lawyers, and held her faith.
Finally in the spring of 1828, Peter was returned to her care— but Truth’s work was far from over.
She would dedicate the rest of her life to pursuing justice and spiritual understanding.
Truth was born into slavery as Isabella Baumfree in the late 18th century in Ulster County, New York.
Although New York state had announced the abolition of slavery in 1799, the emancipation act was gradual.
Those who were currently enslaved were forced to serve a period of indentured servitude until their mid-20s.
Throughout this period, enslavers repeatedly sold Baumfree, tearing her from her loved ones.
Often, she was explicitly prevented from pursuing new relationships.
Eventually, she married an enslaved man named Thomas, with whom she had three children.
She was desperate to keep her new family together— but the slow progress of abolition threatened this hope.
Baumfree’s enslaver, John Dumont, had promised to free her by 1826.
When he failed to keep his word, Baumfree fled for her safety.
During the escape, she was only able to rescue her youngest daughter Sophia, while her other children remained in bondage.
It would be two years before she regained custody of Peter.
After that, she would wait another two years before she saw any of her other children.
During this time, Baumfree found solace in her faith and became increasingly dedicated to religious reflection.
After settling in Kingston, New York, she joined a Methodist community that shared her political views.
She continued her practice of speaking aloud to God in private, and one night, her evening prayers took on even more sacred significance.
Baumfree claimed to hear the voice of God, telling her to leave Kingston, and share her holy message with others.
Though she never learned to read or write, Baumfree became known as an electrifying orator, whose speeches drew on Biblical references, spiritual ideals, and her experience of slavery.
Her sermons denounced the oppression of African Americans and women in general, and became prominent in campaigns for both abolition and women’s rights.
In 1843, she renamed herself Sojourner Truth and embarked on a legendary speaking tour.
Truth saw her journey as a mission from God.
Her faith often led her to the nation’s most hostile regions, where she spoke to bigoted audiences as the only Black woman in the crowd.
Truth was confident God would protect her, but some crowds responded to her bravery with violence.
During one of her sermons, a mob of white men threatened to set fire to the tent where she was speaking.
In her memoir, Truth recalled steeling herself to confront them: “Have I not faith enough to go out and quell that mob… I felt as if I had three hearts!
And that they were so large, my body could hardly hold them!” She placated the men with song and prayer, until they had no desire to harm her.
Truth’s speeches impacted thousands of people in communities across the nation, but her activism went far beyond public speaking.
During the Civil War, she became involved with the Union Army, recruiting soldiers and organizing supplies for Black troops.
Her work was so well regarded that she was invited to meet President Lincoln.
She took the occasion to argue that all formerly enslaved people should be granted land by the government.
Truth continued to travel and speak well into her 80s.
Until her death in 1883, she remained an outspoken critic who fought for her right to be heard in a hostile world.
As Truth once said, “I feel safe even in the midst of my enemies; for the truth is powerful and will prevail."
Can you guess what you’re looking at?
Is it a fuzzy sock? An overripe banana? A moldy tube of toothpaste?
In fact, this is the humble sea cucumber, and while it might look odd, its daily toil paves the way for entire ecosystems to thrive.
Sea cucumbers are members of the phylum Echinodermata, along with sea urchins, starfish and other radially symmetrical, “spiny-skinned” marine invertebrates.
Some sea cucumbers have feathery tentacles flowing from their mouths, some are puffed like bloated balloons, and others simply look like Headless Chicken Monsters— the actual name given to a rare deep-sea species.
But they are generally characterized by their long, cylindrical shape.
A sea cucumber is essentially a brainless, fleshy form surrounding a digestive tract, bookended by a mouth and an anus.
Adhesive tube feet run the length of their bodies and allow them to scoot along the seafloor.
Specialized tube feet can be used for feeding and respiration, though many sea cucumbers actually breathe through their anuses.
Rhythmically contracting and relaxing their muscles, they draw water in and out over an internal lung-like structure called a respiratory tree that extracts oxygen from seawater.
Certain species of crabs and pearlfish take advantage of this rhythmic action and, once the sea cucumber’s anus is dilated, they shimmy in and take shelter.
The rear end of a single sea cucumber can harbor up to fifteen pearlfish at a time.
However, it seems that not all sea cucumbers put up with this intrusive behavior.
Some species are equipped with five teeth around their anus, suggesting that they may have taken an evolutionary stand against unwanted guests.
But even sea cucumbers that lack anal teeth are outfitted with tools to defend themselves.
They evade threats and launch counter-attacks using their mutable collagenous tissue, or MCT.
This gel-like tissue contains bundles of collagen, called “fibrils.” Proteins can interact with these fibrils to slide them together, stiffening the tissue, or apart, softening it.
This versatile tissue has many advantages: it aids in efficient locomotion, enables sea cucumbers to fit into small spaces, and allows them to reproduce asexually by splitting apart.
But MCT’s most explosive application is employed when a predator attacks.
By loosening the attachments of internal tissues then quickly softening and contracting their muscles, many species are capable of shooting a wide range of organs out of their anuses.
This act is called “evisceration” and it’s a surprisingly effective defense mechanism.
In addition to startling and distracting predators, the innards of some sea cucumber species are sticky and toxic.
Evisceration may seem drastic, but sea cucumbers are able to regenerate what they’ve lost to their gut reaction in just a few weeks’ time.
Aside from the few species that have evolved to swim and those that feed without moving, many of these cumbersome creatures pass their time grazing the seabed.
Sea cucumbers are found everywhere from shallow shores to abyssal trenches 6,000 meters below sea level.
On the deep sea floor, they comprise the majority of animal biomass, reaching up to 95% in some areas.
As these sausage-shaped wonders trudge along, they vacuum up sand, digest the organic matter it contains, and excrete the byproduct.
In this process, sea cucumbers clean and oxygenate the seafloor by breaking down detritus and recycling nutrients.
This creates the conditions for sea grass beds and shellfish to thrive.
Sea cucumber excretions can also aid in coral formation and may play a role in buffering marine environments from ocean acidification.
As the ocean’s vacuum cleaners, they are very good at their job: about half of the sandy seafloor is thought to have passed through the digestive tract of a sea cucumber.
So next time you’re rejoicing in the feeling of sand crunching between your toes, consider this: those very grains of sand might have, at one point or another, been excreted by a pickle that breathes through its butt.
Most of the time, art and science stare at each other across a gulf of mutual incomprehension.
There is great confusion when the two look at each other.
Art, of course, looks at the world through the psyche, the emotions -- the unconscious at times -- and of course the aesthetic.
Science tends to look at the world through the rational, the quantitative -- things that can be measured and described -- but it gives art a terrific context of understanding.
In the Extreme Ice Survey, we're dedicated to bringing those two parts of human understanding together, to merging the art and science to the end of helping us understand nature and humanity's relationship with nature better.
Specifically, I as a person who's been a professional nature photographer my whole adult life, am firmly of the belief that photography, video, film have tremendous powers for helping us understand and shape the way we think about nature and about ourselves in relationship to nature.
In this project, we're specifically interested, of course, in ice.
I'm fascinated by the beauty of it, the mutability of it, the malleability of it, and the fabulous shapes in which it can carve itself.
These first images are from Greenland.
But ice has another meaning.
Ice is the canary in the global coal mine.
It's the place where we can see and touch and hear and feel climate change in action.
Climate change is a really abstract thing in most of the world.
Whether or not you believe in it is based on your sense of is it raining more or is it raining less?
Is it getting hotter or is it getting colder?
What do the computer models say about this, that and the other thing?
All of that, strip it away. In the world of the arctic and alpine environments, where the ice is, it's real and it's present.
The changes are happening. They're very visible.
They're photographable. They're measurable.
95 percent of the glaciers in the world are retreating or shrinking.
That's outside Antarctica.
95 percent of the glaciers in the world are retreating or shrinking, and that's because the precipitation patterns and the temperature patterns are changing.
There is no significant scientific dispute about that.
It's been observed, it's measured, it's bomb-proof information.
And the great irony and tragedy of our time is that a lot of the general public thinks that science is still arguing about that.
Science is not arguing about that.
In these images we see ice from enormous glaciers, ice sheets that are hundreds of thousands of years old breaking up into chunks, and chunk by chunk by chunk, iceberg by iceberg, turning into global sea level rise.
So, having seen all of this in the course of a 30-year career, I was still a skeptic about climate change until about 10 years ago, because I thought the story of climate change was based on computer models.
I hadn't realized it was based on concrete measurements of what the paleoclimates -- the ancient climates -- were, as recorded in the ice sheets, as recorded in deep ocean sediments, as recorded in lake sediments, tree rings, and a lot of other ways of measuring temperature.
When I realized that climate change was real, and it was not based on computer models, I decided that one day I would do a project looking at trying to manifest climate change photographically.
And that led me to this project.
Initially, I was working on a National Geographic assignment -- conventional, single frame, still photography.
And one crazy day, I got the idea that I should -- after that assignment was finished -- I got the idea that I should shoot in time-lapse photography, that I should station a camera or two at a glacier and let it shoot every 15 minutes, or every hour or whatever and watch the progression of the landscape over time.
Well, within about three weeks, I incautiously turned that idea of a couple of time-lapse cameras into 25 time-lapse cameras.
And the next six months of my life were the hardest time in my career, trying to design, build and deploy out in the field these 25 time-lapse cameras.
They are powered by the sun. Solar panels power them.
Power goes into a battery. There is a custom made computer that tells the camera when to fire.
And these cameras are positioned on rocks on the sides of the glaciers, and they look in on the glacier from permanent, bedrock positions, and they watch the evolution of the landscape.
We just had a number of cameras out on the Greenland Ice Sheet.
We actually drilled holes into the ice, way deep down below the thawing level, and had some cameras out there for the past month and a half or so.
Actually, there's still a camera out there right now.
In any case, the cameras shoot roughly every hour.
Some of them shoot every half hour, every 15 minutes, every five minutes.
Here's a time lapse of one of the time-lapse units being made.
(Laughter) I personally obsessed about every nut, bolt and washer in these crazy things.
I spent half my life at our local hardware store during the months when we built these units originally.
We're working in most of the major glaciated regions of the northern hemisphere.
Our time-lapse units are in Alaska, the Rockies, Greenland and Iceland, and we have repeat photography positions, that is places we just visit on an annual basis, in British Columbia, the Alps and Bolivia.
It's a big undertaking. I stand here before you tonight as an ambassador for my whole team.
There's a lot of people working on this right now.
We've got 33 cameras out this moment.
We just had 33 cameras shoot about half an hour ago all across the northern hemisphere, watching what's happened.
And we've spent a lot of time in the field. It's been a fantastic amount of work.
We've been out for two and a half years, and we've got about another two and a half years yet to go.
That's only half our job.
The other half of our job is to tell the story to the global public.
You know, scientists have collected this kind of information off and on over the years, but a lot of it stays within the science community.
Similarly, a lot of art projects stay in the art community, and I feel very much a responsibility through mechanisms like TED, and like our relationship with the Obama White House, with the Senate, with John Kerry, to influence policy as much as possible with these pictures as well.
We've done films. We've done books. We have more coming.
We have a site on Google Earth that Google Earth was generous enough to give us, and so forth, because we feel very much the need to tell this story, because it is such an immediate evidence of ongoing climate change right now.
Now, one bit of science before we get into the visuals.
If everybody in the developed world understood this graph, and emblazoned it on the inside of their foreheads, there would be no further societal argument about climate change because this is the story that counts.
Everything else you hear is just propaganda and confusion.
Key issues: this is a 400,000 year record.
This exact same pattern is seen going back now almost a million years before our current time.
And several things are important.
Number one: temperature and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere go up and down basically in sync.
You can see that from the orange line and the blue line.
Nature naturally has allowed carbon dioxide to go up to 280 parts per million.
That's the natural cycle.
Goes up to 280 and then drops for various reasons that aren't important to discuss right here.
But 280 is the peak.
Right now, if you look at the top right part of that graph, we're at 385 parts per million.
We are way, way outside the normal, natural variability.
Earth is having a fever.
In the past hundred years, the temperature of the Earth has gone up 1.3 degrees Fahrenheit, .75 degrees Celsius, and it's going to keep going up because we keep dumping fossil fuels into the atmosphere.
At the rate of about two and a half parts per million per year.
It's been a remorseless, steady increase.
We have to turn that around.
That's the crux, and someday I hope to emblazon that across Times Square in New York and a lot of other places.
But anyway, off to the world of ice.
We're now at the Columbia Glacier in Alaska.
This is a view of what's called the calving face.
This is what one of our cameras saw over the course of a few months.
You see the glacier flowing in from the right, dropping off into the sea, camera shooting every hour.
If you look in the middle background, you can see the calving face bobbing up and down like a yo-yo.
That means that glacier's floating and it's unstable, and you're about to see the consequences of that floating.
To give you a little bit of a sense of scale, that calving face in this picture is about 325 feet tall. That's 32 stories.
This is not a little cliff. This is like a major office building in an urban center.
The calving face is the wall where the visible ice breaks off, but in fact, it goes down below sea level another couple thousand feet.
So there's a wall of ice a couple thousand feet deep going down to bedrock if the glacier's grounded on bedrock, and floating if it isn't.
Here's what Columbia's done. This is in south central Alaska.
This was an aerial picture I did one day in June three years ago.
This is an aerial picture we did this year.
That's the retreat of this glacier.
The main stem, the main flow of the glacier is coming from the right and it's going very rapidly up that stem.
We're going to be up there in just a few more weeks, and we expect that it's probably retreated another half a mile, but if I got there and discovered that it had collapsed and it was five miles further back, I wouldn't be the least bit surprised.
Now it's really hard to grasp the scale of these places, because as the glaciers -- one of the things is that places like Alaska and Greenland are huge, they're not normal landscapes -- but as the glaciers are retreating, they're also deflating, like air is being let out of a balloon.
And so, there are features on this landscape.
There's a ridge right in the middle of the picture, up above where that arrow comes in, that shows you that a little bit.
There's a marker line called the trim line above our little red illustration there.
This is something no self-respecting photographer would ever do -- you put some cheesy illustration on your shot, right? -- and yet you have to do it sometimes to narrate these points.
But, in any case, the deflation of this glacier since 1984 has been higher than the Eiffel Tower, higher than the Empire State Building.
A tremendous amount of ice has been let out of these valleys as it's retreated and deflated, gone back up valley.
These changes in the alpine world are accelerating.
It's not static.
Particularly in the world of sea ice, the rate of natural change is outstripping predictions of just a few years ago, and the processes either are accelerating or the predictions were too low to begin with.
But in any case, there are big, big changes happening as we speak.
So, here's another time-lapse shot of Columbia.
And you see where it ended in these various spring days, June, May, then October.
Now we turn on our time lapse.
This camera was shooting every hour.
Geologic process in action here.
And everybody says, well don't they advance in the winter time?
No. It was retreating through the winter because it's an unhealthy glacier.
Finally catches up to itself, it advances.
And you can look at these pictures over and over again because there's such a strange, bizarre fascination in seeing these things you don't normally get to see come alive.
We've been talking about "seeing is believing " and seeing the unseen at TED Global.
That's what you see with these cameras.
The images make the invisible visible.
These huge crevasses open up.
These great ice islands break off -- and now watch this.
This has been the springtime this year -- a huge collapse. That happened in about a month, the loss of all that ice.
So that's where we started three years ago, way out on the left, and that's where we were a few months ago, the last time we went into Columbia.
To give you a feeling for the scale of the retreat, we did another cheesy illustration, with British double-decker buses.
If you line up 295 of those nose to tail, that's about how far back that was.
It's a long way.
On up to Iceland.
One of my favorite glaciers, the Sólheimajökull.
And here, if you watch, you can see the terminus retreating.
You can see this river being formed.
You can see it deflating.
Without the photographic process, you would never see this. This is invisible.
You can stand up there your whole life and you would never see this, but the camera records it.
So we wind time backwards now.
We go back a couple years in time.
That's where it started.
That's where it ended a few months ago.
And on up to Greenland.
The smaller the ice mass, the faster it responds to climate.
Greenland took a little while to start reacting to the warming climate of the past century, but it really started galloping along about 20 years ago.
And there's been a tremendous increase in the temperature up there.
It's a big place. That's all ice.
All those colors are ice and it goes up to about two miles thick, just a gigantic dome that comes in from the coast and rises in the middle.
The one glacier up in Greenland that puts more ice into the global ocean than all the other glaciers in the northern hemisphere combined is the Ilulissat Glacier.
We have some cameras on the south edge of the Ilulissat, watching the calving face as it goes through this dramatic retreat.
Here's a two-year record of what that looks like.
Helicopter in front of the calving face for scale, quickly dwarfed.
The calving face is four and a half miles across, and in this shot, as we pull back, you're only seeing about a mile and a half.
So, imagine how big this is and how much ice is charging out.
The interior of Greenland is to the right.
It's flowing out to the Atlantic Ocean on the left.
Icebergs, many, many, many, many times the size of this building, are roaring out to sea.
We just downloaded these pictures a couple weeks ago, as you can see. June 25th, monster calving events happened.
I'll show you one of those in a second.
This glacier has doubled its flow speed in the past 15 years.
It now goes at 125 feet a day, dumping all this ice into the ocean.
It tends to go in these pulses, about every three days, but on average, 125 feet a day, twice the rate it did 20 years ago.
Okay. We had a team out watching this glacier, and we recorded the biggest calving event that's ever been put on film.
We had nine cameras going.
This is what a couple of the cameras saw.
A 400-foot-tall calving face breaking off.
Huge icebergs rolling over.
Okay, how big was that? It's hard to get it.
So an illustration again, gives you a feeling for scale.
A mile of retreat in 75 minutes across the calving face, in that particular event, three miles wide.
The block was three-fifths of a mile deep, and if you compare the expanse of the calving face to the Tower Bridge in London, about 20 bridges wide.
Or if you take an American reference, to the U.S. Capitol Building and you pack 3,000 Capitol Buildings into that block, it would be equivalent to how large that block was.
75 minutes.
Now I've come to the conclusion after spending a lot of time in this climate change world that we don't have a problem of economics, technology and public policy.
We have a problem of perception.
The policy and the economics and the technology are serious enough issues, but we actually can deal with them.
I'm certain that we can.
But what we have is a perception problem because not enough people really get it yet.
You're an elite audience. You get it.
Fortunately, a lot of the political leaders in the major countries of the world are an elite audience that for the most part gets it now.
But we still need to bring a lot of people along with us.
And that's where I think organizations like TED, like the Extreme Ice Survey can have a terrific impact on human perception and bring us along.
Because I believe we have an opportunity right now.
We are nearly on the edge of a crisis, but we still have an opportunity to face the greatest challenge of our generation and, in fact, of our century.
This is a terrific, terrific call to arms to do the right thing for ourselves and for the future.
I hope that we have the wisdom to let the angels of our better nature rise to the occasion and do what needs to be done. Thank you.
(Applause)
I must have been about 12 years old when my dad took me to an exhibition on space, not far from here, in Brussels.
And the year was about -- I think it was 1988, so it was the end of the Cold War.
There was a bit of an upmanship going on between the Americans and the Russians bringing bits to that exhibition.
NASA brought a big blow-up space shuttle, but the Russians, they brought a Mir space station.
It was actually the training module, and you could go inside and check it all out.
It was the real thing -- where the buttons were, where the wires were, where the astronauts were eating, where they were working.
And when I came home, the first thing I did, I started drawing spaceships.
Now, these weren't science fiction spaceships, no.
They were actually technical drawings.
They were cutaway sections of what kind of structure would be made out of, where the wires were, where the screws were.
So fortunately, I didn't become a space engineer, but I did become an architect.
These are some of the projects that I've been involved with over the last decade and a half.
All these projects are quite different, quite different shapes, and it is because they are built for different environments.
They have different constraints.
And I think design becomes really interesting when you get really harsh constraints.
Now, these projects have been all over the world.
A few years ago, this map wasn't good enough.
It was too small.
We had to add this one, because we were going to do a project on the Moon for the European Space Agency; they asked us to design a Moon habitat -- and one on Mars with NASA, a competition to look at a habitation on Mars.
Whenever you go to another place, as an architect and try to design something, you look at the local architecture, the precedents that are there.
Now, on the Moon, it's kind of difficult, of course, because there's only this.
There's only the Apollo missions.
So last that we went there, I wasn't even born yet, and we only spent about three days there.
So for me, that's kind of a long camping trip, isn't it, but a rather expensive one.
Now, the tricky thing, when you're going to build on another planet or a moon, is how to get it there, how to get it there.
So first of all, to get a kilogram, for example, to the Moon's surface, it will cost about 200,000 dollars, very expensive.
So you want to keep it very light.
Second, space. Space is limited. Right?
This is the Ariane 5 rocket.
The space you have there is about four and a half meters by seven meters, not that much.
So it needs to be an architectural system that is both compact, or compactable, and light, and I think I've got one right here.
It's very compact, and it's very light.
And actually, this is one I made earlier.
Now, there's one problem with it, that inflatables are quite fragile.
They need to be protected, specifically, when you go to a very harsh environment like the Moon.
Look at it like this.
The temperature difference on a Moon base could be anything up to 200 degrees.
On one side of the base, it could be 100 degrees Celsius and on the other side, it could be minus 100 degrees.
We need to protect ourselves from that.
The Moon also does not have any magnetic fields, which means that any radiation -- solar radiation, cosmic radiation -- will hit the surface.
We need to protect ourselves from that as well, protect the astronauts from that.
And then third, but definitely not last, the Moon does not have any atmosphere, which means any meteorites coming into it will not get burned up, and they'll hit the surface.
That's why the Moon is full of craters.
Again, we need to protect the astronauts from that.
So what kind of structure do we need?
Well, the best thing is really a cave, because a cave has a lot of mass, and we need mass.
We need mass to protect ourselves from the temperatures, from the radiation and from the meteorites.
So this is how we solved it.
We have indeed the blue part, as you can see.
That's an inflatable for our Moon base.
It gives a lot of living space and a lot of lab space, and attached to it you have a cylinder, and that has all the support structures in, all the life support and also the airlock.
And on top of that, we have a structure, that domed structure, that protects ourselves, has a lot of mass in it.
Where are we going to get this material from?
Are we going to bring concrete and cement from Earth to the Moon?
Well, of course not, because it's way too heavy.
It's too expensive.
So we're going to go and use local materials.
Now, local materials are something we deal with on Earth as well.
Wherever we build or whatever country we build in, we always look at, what are the local materials here?
The problem with the Moon is, what are the local materials?
Well, there's not that many.
Actually, we have one.
It's moondust, or, fancier scientific name, regolith, Moon regolith.
Great thing is, it's everywhere, right?
The surface is covered with it.
It's about 20 centimeters up to a few meters everywhere.
But how are we going to build with it?
Well, we're going to use a 3D printer.
Whenever I ask any of you what a 3D printer is, you're probably all thinking, well, probably something about this size and it would print things that are about this size.
So of course I'm not going to bring a massive 3D printer to the Moon to print my Moon base.
I'm going to use a much smaller device, something like this one here.
So this is a small device, a small robot rover, that has a little scoop, and it brings the regolith to the dome and then it lays down a thin layer of regolith, and then you would have the robot that will solidify it, layer by layer, until it creates, after a few months, the full base.
You might have noticed that it's quite a particular structure that we're printing, and I've got a little example here.
What we call this is a closed-cell foam structure.
Looks quite natural.
The reason why we're using this as part of that shell structure is that we only need to solidify certain parts, which means we have to bring less binder from Earth, and it becomes much lighter.
Now -- that approach of designing something and then covering it with a protective dome we also did for our Mars project.
You can see it here, three domes.
And you see the printers printing these dome structures.
There's a big difference between Mars and the Moon, and let me explain it.
This diagram shows you to scale the size of Earth and the Moon and the real distance, about 400,000 kilometers.
If we then go to Mars, the distance from Mars to Earth -- and this picture here is taken by the rover on Mars, Curiosity, looking back at Earth.
You kind of see the little speckle there, that's Earth, 400 million kilometers away.
The problem with that distance is that it's a thousand times the distance of the Earth to the Moon, pretty far away, but there's no direct radio contact with, for example, the Curiosity rover.
So I cannot teleoperate it from Earth.
I can't say, "Oh, Mars rover, go left," because that signal would take 20 minutes to get to Mars.
Then the rover might go left, and then it will take another 20 minutes before it can tell me, "Oh yeah, I went left."
So the distance, so rovers and robots and going to have to work autonomously.
The only issue with it is that missions to Mars are highly risky.
We've only seen it a few weeks ago.
So what if half the mission doesn't arrive at Mars.
What do we do?
Well, instead of building just one or two rovers like we did on the Moon, we're going to build hundreds of them.
And it's a bit like a termite's mound, you know?
Termites, I would take half of the colony of the termites away, they would still be able to build the mound.
It might take a little bit longer.
Same here.
If half of our rovers or robots don't arrive, well, it will take a bit longer, but you will still be able to do it.
So here we even have three different rovers.
In the back, you see the digger.
It's really good at digging regolith.
Then we have the transporter, great at taking regolith and bringing it to the structure.
And the last ones, the little ones with the little legs, they don't need to move a lot.
What they do is they go and sit on a layer of regolith and then microwave it together, and layer by layer create that dome structure.
Now -- we also want to try that out, so we went out on a road trip, and we created our own swarm of robots.
There you go.
So we built 10 of those. It's a small swarm.
And we took six tons of sand, and we tried out how these little robots would actually be able to move sand around, Earth sand in this case.
And they were not teleoperated. Right?
Nobody was telling them go left, go right, or giving them a predescribed path.
No. They were given a task: move sand from this area to that area.
And if they came across an obstacle, like a rock, they had to sort it out themselves.
Or they came across another robot, they had to be able to make decisions.
Or even if half of them fell out, their batteries died, they still had to be able to finish that task.
Now, I've talked about redundancy.
But that was not only with the robots.
It was also with the habitats.
On the Mars project, we decided to do three domes, because if one didn't arrive, the other two could still form a base, and that was mainly because each of the domes actually have a life support system built in the floor, so they can work independently.
So in a way, you might think, well, this is pretty crazy.
Why would you, as an architect, get involved in space?
Because it's such a technical field.
Well, I'm actually really convinced that from a creative view or a design view, you are able to solve really hard and really constrained problems.
And I really feel that there is a place for design and architecture in projects like interplanetary habitation.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You’ve been accused of a crime you did not commit.
It’s impossible to prove your innocence.
If you insist that you’re innocent anyway, you’ll likely be found guilty and executed.
But if you confess, apologize, and implicate others for good measure, you’ll go free.
Do you give a false confession— or risk a public hanging?
This was the choice facing those accused of witchcraft in the village of Salem, Massachusetts between February 1692 and May 1693.
They were the victims of paranoia about the supernatural, misdirected religious fervor— and a justice system that valued repentance over truth.
Salem was settled in 1626 by Puritans, a group of English protestants.
Life was strict and isolated for the people of Salem.
Battles with their Native American neighbors and groups of French settlers were commonplace.
People feared starvation and disease, and relations between villagers were strained.
To make matters worse, 1692 brought one of the coldest winters on record.
That winter, two cousins, 9 year old Betty Parris and 11 year old Abigail Williams started behaving very strangely.
A physician found nothing physically wrong — but diagnosed the girls as under “an evil hand.” Puritans believed that the Devil wreaked havoc in the world through human agents, or witches, who blighted nature, conjured fiendish apparitions, and tormented children.
As news swept through the village, the symptoms appeared to spread.
Accounts describe 12 so-called “afflicted” girls contorting their bodies, having fits, and complaining of prickling skin.
Four of the girls soon accused three local women of tormenting them.
All three of the accused were considered outsiders in some way.
On February 29th, the authorities arrested Sarah Good, a poor pregnant mother of a young daughter, Sarah Osbourne, who had long been absent from church and was suing the family of one of her accusers, and Tituba, an enslaved woman in Betty Parris’s home known by her first name only.
Tituba denied harming the girls at first.
But then she confessed to practicing witchcraft on the Devil’s orders, and charged Good and Osbourne with having forced her.
Osbourne and Good both maintained their innocence.
Osbourne died in prison, while Good’s husband turned against her in court, testifying that she "was a witch or would be one very quickly."
Good’s 4 year old daughter was imprisoned and eventually gave testimony against her mother.
Meanwhile, Good gave birth in jail.
Her baby died, and she was convicted and hanged shortly thereafter.
Tituba was held in custody until May, and then released.
These three victims were just the beginning.
As accusations multiplied, others, like Tituba, made false confession to save themselves.
The authorities even reportedly told one accused witch that she would be hanged if she did not confess, and freed if she did.
They were not particularly interested in thoroughly investigating the charges— in keeping with their Church’s teachings, they preferred that the accused confessed, asked for forgiveness, and promised not to engage in more witchcraft.
The court accepted all kinds of dubious evidence, including so-called “spectral evidence” in which the girls began raving when supposedly touched by invisible ghosts.
Complicating matters further, many of the jurors in the trials were relatives of the accusers, compromising their objectivity.
Those who dared to speak out, such as Judge Nathanial Saltonstall, came under suspicion.
By the spring of 1693, over a hundred people had been imprisoned, and 14 women and 6 men had been executed.
By this time, accusations were starting to spread beyond Salem to neighboring communities, and even the most powerful figures were targets.
When his own wife was accused, the governor of Massachusetts colony suspended the trials.
Sentences were amended, prisoners released, and arrests stopped.
Some have speculated that the girls were suffering from hallucinations caused by fungus; or a condition that caused swelling of the brain.
But ultimately, the reason for their behavior is unknown.
What we do know is that adults accepted wild accusations by children as hard evidence.
Today, the Salem Witch Trials remain a cautionary tale of the dangers of groupthink and scapegoating, and the power of fear to manipulate human perception.
Shah Rukh Khan: The speaker you are about to meet is someone who knows and understands the value of words like no one else does.
In his writing career spanning over four decades, this man has chosen words with beauty and versatility, like a flower springing to life ...
like Mr. Bachchan’s memorable punches ...
(Laughter) like a best-selling book of Urdu poetry ...
like well ... what do I say, only Javed Akhtar Sahab.
(Applause) Please welcome onstage, the one and only Javed Akhtar Sahab.
(Cheers and applause) Javed Akhtar: Friends, this topic -- the power of words -- is an interesting one, and one that's very close to my heart.
It’s strange how we often overlook things that are so close to us, near us.
How many people question, "Why is air transparent?"
Or, "Why is water wet?"
How many think about what is it that has passed?
Time has passed. What came? What went away?
How many of us wonder?
Similarly ...
the words that we speak and hear all day, how many times have we really thought, "What exactly are these words?"
Words are a strange thing.
You once saw an animal and decided it’s a "cat."
But cat is a sound.
This cat has nothing to do with the animal.
But I have decided it’s a cat.
So a cat it is.
After that I made a semicircle, a pyramid, cut into half, then a straight line, then another below it, and wrote: "cat."
In these criss-crossed lines, I filled a sound and into that sound, a meaning.
Now like with this cat, even with love, anger, a thought, an idea, pain, suffering, happiness, surprise, everything has been linked with a sound.
And then sounds were fit into some criss-crossed lines that we call a script.
So three things that had nothing in common were joined by us to create a word.
A sound that is actually gibberish has been added onto it.
And the lines, crooked lines, they formed a word.
Incredible!
And I have come to believe that with time, these words have become like human beings.
A man is known by the company he keeps.
Similarly, with words, what is the company it has been keeping?
What are the other words being used with it?
For an average noun or an average verb, an average mind can quickly create reference.
Where did they hear it? See it?
What does it remind them of?
What is its connection? When was it last used in conversation?
What has been my experience with it?
A host of memories appear when you hear a word you remember.
And a good writer or orator is one who knows that when he uses a certain word, an average mind will associate it with a certain reference, specific memories will be evoked.
Then he can create a world around a word.
What is the power of a word?
Be it a mother’s lullaby, a politician’s speech, love letters from your beloved, or a complaint against someone, a protest call ...
anger, sadness, happiness, surprise, belonging, alienation anything in the world, any feeling in the world, any emotion, any reaction, until it is expressed in a word, it will not have any meaning for you, forget getting across to anyone else.
Words are not thoughts, just like bricks are not homes.
But houses are made with bricks.
If you have less bricks, you will make a small house.
The more words you have, the clearer your thoughts, and the more clearly you can convey them.
Nowadays I often hear, especially from young ones, “You know what I mean?"
No, I don't know what you mean.
(Laughter) “You know what I mean,” is running out of words.
Everything is now moving fast so communication has to be fast as well.
But the tragedy is that we have attained this speed at the cost of depth of words.
We want to speak faster, so everything is faster, so the language is also faster, hence communication is faster.
Which means that forget about other people, just look at yourself.
You are not being able to articulate your own feelings, thoughts or emotions in a detailed manner or clearly.
And these words, as long as words exist, they aren’t there just for a meaning.
They are also a conveyer belt of language, words.
They reflect your culture, your traditions, your inheritance, your cultural wealth accumulated over generations, all of that is carried forward with words.
If you cut a man off from some words, you cut him off from a culture, a history.
This is exactly what is happening with us today.
So language is a very powerful thing.
Words are extremely powerful.
But by themselves, they are neither good nor bad.
If we start loving words and understand their power, we would realize that everything that happens in the world is because of words.
Or there would be nothing between us and the rest of the creatures, the rest of the animals, although we too are animals.
The only difference is that we can pass on, through our words, our experience, our learning and our knowledge to the next generation.
So we don’t only live on instinct but our slowly accumulated experience and knowledge over generations is passed on to the next.
Through what? Through words.
And if we didn’t have these words our advantage is gradually over other species would diminish over time.
We advanced only because we have language.
And if we didn’t have that we wouldn’t be here.
We would be right where we started.
So what does language mean?
Words!
So learn to respect words.
Love them.
Befriend them.
Listen to them attentively.
And speak attentively.
Thank you!
(Applause) SRK: Thanks a lot, Javed Sahab, for coming here today and sharing such wonderful things with us.
I have known Javed Sahab since I came to Mumbai about 25 years ago.
JA: I was really young then.
(Laughter) SRK: Yes. You are still very young, Sir.
But I have got a lot of my education, my ideologies and many more things from Javed Sahab.
I’ll share a small incident.
He got angry with us while working on a film.
He sometimes gets angry when unlettered people like us give him suggestions that maybe we could use this word or that instead.
So our film was called "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai."
(Cheers) And he did not like the title at all.
So once when he was really mad at us kids, who are like his kids even now, he retorted: "Now my heart remains neither awake nor rests.
What do I do? Oh! I feel something strange.
Is that what you want?"
In fact the entire song, all the words, were thrown at us by Javed Sahab in anger.
And that song went on to become extremely popular.
So even when Javed Sahab throws out words in anger, they turn into golden words.
That’s his gift.
(Cheers) JA: Well, the incident that Shah Rukh Sahab shared is indeed true.
So on hearing this title, "'Kuch Kuch Hota Hai," I was shocked.
I felt it wasn’t dignified enough.
(Laughter) Though to be honest, I regret leaving such a super hit film over its title.
So I left the film.
Later I also felt a little embarrassed, and he too felt bad.
So we decided to let bygones be bygones and work on some other film.
Hence, the film "Kal Ho Naa Ho."
I told him that everything else is still fine but I owe you two kuchs.
Two kuchs.
(Laughter) So I’ll write a song and return these two to you.
I wrote a song specially for this reason called "Kuch to hua hai, kuch ho gaya hai."
(Cheers and applause) and he returned his two.
(Applause) Ladies and gentlemen, big round of applause for Javed Akhtar Sahab.
(Applause)
Today I want to talk to you about swimming across the North Pole, across the most northern place in the whole world.
And perhaps the best place to start is with my late father.
He was a great storyteller.
He could tell a story about an event, and so you felt you were absolutely there at the moment.
And one of the stories he told me so often when I was a young boy was of the first British atomic bomb test.
He had been there and watched it go off.
And he said that the explosion was so loud and the light was so intense, that he actually had to put his hands in front of his face to protect his eyes.
And he said that he could actually see an x-ray of his fingers, because the light was so bright.
And I know that watching that atomic bomb going off had a very, very big impact on my late father.
Every holiday I had as a young boy was in a national park.
What he was trying to do with me was to inspire me to protect the world, and show me just how fragile the world is.
He also told me about the great explorers.
He loved history. He would tell me about Captain Scott walking all the way to the South Pole and Sir Edmund Hillary climbing up Mount Everest.
And so ever since I think I was just six years old, I dreamed of going to the polar regions.
I really, really wanted to go to the Arctic.
There was something about that place which drew me to it.
And, well, sometimes it takes a long time for a dream to come true.
But seven years ago, I went to the Arctic for the first time.
And it was so beautiful that I've been back there ever since, for the last seven years.
I love the place.
But I have seen that place change beyond all description, just in that short period of time.
I have seen polar bears walking across very, very thin ice in search of food.
I have swum in front of glaciers which have retreated so much.
And I have also, every year, seen less and less sea ice.
And I wanted the world to know what was happening up there.
In the two years before my swim, 23 percent of the arctic sea ice cover just melted away.
And I wanted to really shake the lapels of world leaders to get them to understand what is happening.
So I decided to do this symbolic swim at the top of the world, in a place which should be frozen over, but which now is rapidly unfreezing.
And the message was very clear: Climate change is for real, and we need to do something about it.
And we need to do something about it right now.
Well, swimming across the North Pole, it's not an ordinary thing to do.
I mean, just to put it in perspective, 27 degrees is the temperature of a normal indoor swimming pool.
This morning, the temperature of the English Channel was 18 degrees.
The passengers who fell off the Titanic fell into water of just five degrees centigrade.
Fresh water freezes at zero.
And the water at the North Pole is minus 1.7.
It's fucking freezing.
(Laughter) (Applause) I'm sorry, but there is no other way to describe it.
(Laughter) And so I had to assemble an incredible team around me to help me with this task.
I assembled this team of 29 people from 10 nations.
Some people think that swimming is a very solo sport, you just dive into the sea and off you go.
It couldn't be further from the truth for me.
And I then went and did a huge amount of training, swimming in icy water, backwards and forwards.
But the most important thing was to train my mind to prepare myself for what was going to happen.
And I had to visualize the swim.
I had to see it from the beginning all the way to the end.
I had to taste the salt water in my mouth.
I had to see my coach screaming for me, "Come on Lewis! Come on! Go! Go! Go! Don't slow down!"
And so I literally swam across the North Pole hundreds and hundreds of times in my mind.
And then, after a year of training, I felt ready.
I felt confident that I could actually do this swim.
So myself and the five members of the team, we hitched a ride on an icebreaker which was going to the North Pole.
And on day four, we decided to just do a quick five minute test swim.
I had never swum in water of minus 1.7 degrees before, because it's just impossible to train in those types of conditions.
So we stopped the ship, as you do.
We all got down onto the ice, and I then got into my swimming costume and I dived into the sea.
I have never in my life felt anything like that moment.
I could barely breathe. I was gasping for air.
I was hyperventilating so much, and within seconds my hands were numb.
And it was -- the paradox is that you're in freezing cold water, but actually you're on fire.
I swam as hard as I could for five minutes.
I remember just trying to get out of the water.
I climbed out of the ice.
And I remember taking the goggles off my face and looking down at my hands in sheer shock, because my fingers had swollen so much that they were like sausages.
And they were swollen so much, I couldn't even close them.
What had happened is that we are made partially of water, and when water freezes it expands.
And so what had actually happened is that the cells in my fingers had frozen and expanded.
And they had burst. And I was in so much agony.
I immediately got rushed onto the ship and into a hot shower.
And I remember standing underneath the hot shower and trying to defrost my fingers.
And I thought, in two days' time, I was going to do this swim across the North Pole.
I was going to try and do a 20-minute swim, for one kilometer across the North Pole.
And this dream which I had had ever since I was a young boy with my father, was just going out the window.
There is no possibility that this was going to happen.
And I remember then getting out of the shower and realizing I couldn't even feel my hands.
And for a swimmer, you need to feel your hands because you need to be able to grab the water and pull it through with you.
The next morning, I woke up and I was in such a state of depression, and all I could think about was Sir Ranulph Fiennes.
For those of you who don't know him, he's the great British explorer.
A number of years ago, he tried to ski all the way to the North Pole.
He accidentally fell through the ice into the sea.
And after just three minutes in that water, he was able to get himself out.
And his hands were so badly frostbitten that he had to return to England.
He went to a local hospital and there they said, "Ran, there is no possibility of us being able to save these fingers.
We are going to actually have to take them off."
And Ran decided to go into his tool shed and take out a saw and do it himself.
And all I could think of was, if that happened to Ran after three minutes, and I can't feel my hands after five minutes, what on earth is going to happen if I try 20 minutes?
At the very best, I'm going to end up losing some fingers.
And at worst, I didn't even want to think about it.
We carried on sailing through the ice packs towards the North Pole.
And my close friend David, he saw the way I was thinking, and he came up to me and he said, "Lewis, I've known you since you were 18 years old.
I've known you, and I know, Lewis, deep down, right deep down here, that you are going to make this swim.
I so believe in you Lewis. I've seen the way you've been training.
And I realize the reason why you're going to do this.
This is such an important swim.
We stand at a very, very important moment in this history, and you're going to make a symbolic swim here to try to shake the lapels of world leaders.
Lewis, have the courage to go in there, because we are going to look after you every moment of it."
And I just, I got so much confidence from him saying that, because he knew me so well.
So we carried on sailing and we arrived at the North Pole.
And we stopped the ship, and it was just as the scientists had predicted.
There were open patches of sea everywhere.
And I went down into my cabin and I put on my swimming costume.
And then the doctor strapped on a chest monitor, which measures my core body temperature and my heart rate.
And then we walked out onto the ice.
And I remember looking into the ice, and there were big chunks of white ice in there, and the water was completely black.
I had never seen black water before.
And it is 4,200 meters deep.
And I said to myself, "Lewis, don't look left, don't look right.
Just scuttle forward and go for it."
And so I now want to show you a short video of what happened there on the ice.
Narrator (Video): We're just sailing out of harbor now, and it's at this stage when one can have a bit of a wobble mentally.
Everything just looks so gray around here, and looks so cold.
We've just seen our first polar bears.
It was absolutely magical.
A mother and a cub, such a beautiful sight.
And to think that in 30, 40 years they could become extinct.
It's a very frightening, very, very frightening thought.
We're finally at the North Pole. This is months and months and months of dreaming to get here, years of training and planning and preparation.
Ooh. In a couple of hours' time I'm going to get in here and do my swim.
It's all a little bit frightening, and emotional.
Amundson, you ready? Amudson: Ready.
Lewis Pugh: Ten seconds to swim. Ten seconds to swim.
Take the goggles off. Take the goggles off!
Man: Take the shoes. Take the shoes.
Well done lad! You did it! You did it Lewis!
You did it! You did it man!
LP: How on earth did we do that?
Man: Against the current! You did it against the current!
(Applause) LP: Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you so much.
Audience: Encore!
(Laughter) LP: I'd just like to end off by just saying this: It took me four months again to feel my hands.
But was it worth it? Yes, absolutely it was.
There are very, very few people who don't know now about what is happening in the Arctic.
And people ask me, "Lewis, what can we do about climate change?"
And I say to them, I think we need to do three things.
The first thing we need to do is we need to break this problem down into manageable chunks.
You saw during that video all those flags.
Those flags represented the countries from which my team came from.
And equally, when it comes to climate change, every single country is going to have to make cuts.
Britain, America, Japan, South Africa, the Congo.
All of us together, we're all on the same ship together.
The second thing we need to do is we need to just look back at how far we have come in such a short period of time.
I remember, just a few years ago, speaking about climate change, and people heckling me in the back and saying it doesn't even exist.
I've just come back from giving a series of speeches in some of the poorest townships in South Africa to young children as young as 10 years old.
Four or five children sitting behind a desk, and even in those poorest conditions, they all have a very, very good grasp of climate change.
We need to believe in ourselves.
Now is the time to believe.
We've come a long way. We're doing good.
But the most important thing we must do is, I think, we must all walk to the end of our lives and turn around, and ask ourselves a most fundamental question.
And that is, "What type of world do we want to live in, and what decision are we going to make today to ensure that we all live in a sustainable world?"
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very, very much.
(Applause)
Your hands, up close, are anything but smooth.
With peaks and valleys, folds and rifts, there are plenty of hiding places for a virus to stick.
If you then touch your face, the virus can infect you.
But there are two extraordinarily simple ways you can keep that from happening: soap and water, and hand sanitizer.
So which is better?
The coronavirus that causes COVID-19 is one of many viruses whose protective outer surface is made of a lipid bilayer.
These lipids are pin shaped molecules whose heads are attracted to water, and tails are repulsed by it.
So in water-rich environments, lipids naturally form a shell like this, with the heads outside and the tails inside.
Their shared reaction to water makes the lipids stick loosely together— this is called the hydrophobic effect.
This outer structure helps the molecular machinery of the virus break through cellular membranes and hijack our cells.
But it has thousands upon thousands of weak points where the right molecules could pry it apart.
And this is where soap comes in.
A single drop of any brand of soap contains quadrillions of molecules called amphiphiles, which resemble biological lipids.
Their tails, which are similarly repulsed by water, compete for space with the lipids that make up the virus’s shell.
But they’re just different enough to break up the regularity of the virus’s membrane, making the whole thing come crashing down.
Those amphiphiles then form bubbles of their own around particles including the virus’s RNA and proteins.
Apply water, and you’ll wash that whole bubble away.
Hand sanitizers work less like a crowbar, and more like an earthquake.
When you surround a coronavirus with water, the hydrophobic effect gives the bonds within the membrane their strength.
That same effect also holds the big proteins that form coronavirus’s spikes in place and in the shape that enables them to infect your cells.
If you dry the virus out in air, it keeps its stability.
But now surround it with a high concentration of an alcohol, like the ethanol or isopropanol found in most hand-sanitizers.
This makes the hydrophobic effect disappear, and gives the molecules room to move around.
The overall effect is like removing all of the nails and mortar from a house and then hitting it with an earthquake.
The cell’s membrane collapses and those spike proteins crumble.
In either method, the actual process of destroying the virus happens in just a second or two.
But doctors recommend at least 20 seconds of hand-washing because of the intricate landscape that is your hand.
Soap and sanitizer need to get everywhere, including your palms, fingertips, the outsides of your hands, and between your fingers, to protect you properly.
And when it comes to a coronavirus outbreak, doctors recommend washing your hands with soap and water whenever possible.
Even though both approaches are similarly effective at killing the virus, soap and water has two benefits: first it washes away any dirt which could otherwise hide virus particles.
But more importantly, it’s simply easier to fully cover your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds.
Of course, hand sanitizer is more convenient to use on the go.
In the absence of a sink, use the sanitizer as thoroughly as possible and rub your hands together until they’re dry.
Unfortunately, there are billions of people who don’t have access to clean drinking water, which is a huge problem at any time but especially during an outbreak.
Researchers and aid groups are working to provide solutions for these communities.
One example is a device that uses salt, water, and a car battery to make chlorinated water that kills harmful pathogens and is safe for hand-washing.
So wherever possible, soap and water are recommended for a coronavirus, but does that mean it's best for every viral outbreak?
Not necessarily.
Many common colds are caused by rhinoviruses that have a geometric protein structure called a capsid instead of a lipid membrane.
The capsid doesn't have nearly as many weak points where soap amphiphiles can pry it apart, so it takes longer for soap to be effective.
However some of its surface proteins are still vulnerable to the destabilizing effect of hand sanitizer.
In this and similar cases, hand sanitizer may be more effective, especially if you then wash your hands to remove residual particles.
The best way to know which to use for any given outbreak is to do what's best for all things illness-related: follow the advice of accredited medical professionals.
Joan Blades: Do you have politically diverse friends?
What do you talk about with them?
I'm a progressive; I live in a town full of progressives, and 15 years ago, I didn't have any conservative friends.
Now I have a wonderful mix of friends, and they include John.
John Gable: I am not a progressive.
I'm a Republican who grew up in a Republican family in the conservative South, and even worked in Republican politics, locally and at the national level.
But the last 24 years, I've been in technology and living in a very progressive area.
So I have a lot of progressive friends, including Joan.
JB: I was born in Berkeley, California, a notoriously progressive college town.
And I live there now.
In 1998, six months into the Monica Lewinsky-Clinton impeachment scandal, I helped cofound MoveOn.org with a one-sentence petition: "Congress must immediately censure the president and move on to pressing issues facing the nation."
Now, that was actually a very unifying petition in many ways.
You could love Clinton or hate Clinton and agree that the best thing for the country was to move on.
As the leader of MoveOn, I saw the polarization just continue.
And I found myself wondering why I saw things so differently than many people in other parts of the country.
So in 2005, when I had an opportunity to get together with grassroots leaders across the political divide, I grabbed it.
And I became friends with a lot of people I never had a chance to talk to before.
And that included leadership in the Christian Coalition, often seen as on the right the way MoveOn is seen as on the left.
And this lead to me showing up on Capitol Hill with one of the Christian Coalition leaders, my friend, to lobby for net neutrality.
That was powerful.
We turned heads.
So this work was transformational for me.
And I found myself wondering: How could vast numbers of people have the opportunity to really connect with people that have very different views?
JG: I was born Oneida, Tennessee, right across the state border from a small coal mining town, Stearns, Kentucky.
And I lived there for the first few years of my life, before moving to another small town, Frankfort, Kentucky.
Basically, I grew up in small-town America, conservative at its heart.
Now, Stearns and Berkeley -- they're a little different.
(Laughter) So in the '90s I moved out west to a progressive area to work in technology -- worked at Microsoft, worked at Netscape.
I actually became the product manager lead for Netscape Navigator, the first popular web browser.
Now in the early days of the internet, we were just moved and inspired by a vision: when we're connected to all these different people around the world and all these different ideas, we'll be able to make great decisions, and we'll be able to appreciate each other for the beautiful diversity that the whole world has to offer.
Now I also, 20 years ago, gave a speech saying it might not work out that way, that we might actually be trained to discriminate against each other in new ways.
So what happened?
It's not like we just woke up one day and decided to hate each other more.
Here's what happened.
There's just too much noise -- too many people, too many ideas -- so we use technology to filter it out a little bit.
And what happens?
It lets in ideas I already agree with.
It lets in the popular ideas, it lets in people just like me who think just like me.
That sounds kind of good, right?
Well, not necessarily, because two very scary things happen when we have such narrow worldviews.
First, we become more extreme in our beliefs.
Second, we become less tolerant of anybody who's different than we are.
Does this sound familiar?
Does this sound like modern America? The modern world?
Well, the good news is that technology is changing, and it could change for the better.
And that's, in fact, why I started AllSides.com -- to create technologies and services to free us from these filter bubbles.
The very first thing we did was create technology that identifies bias, so we could show different perspectives side by side to free us from the filter bubbles of news media.
And then I met Joan.
JB: So I met John outside of Washington, DC, with an idealistic group of cross-partisan bridge builders, and we wanted to re-weave the fabric of our communities.
We believe that our differences can be a strength, that our values can be complimentary and that we have to overcome the fight so that we can honor everyone's values and not lose any of our own.
I went for this wonderful walk with John, where I started learning about the work he was doing to pierce the filter bubble.
It was powerful; it was brilliant.
Living in separate narratives is not good.
We can't even have a conversation or do collaborative problem-solving when we don't share the same facts.
JG: So one thing you take away from today is if Joan Blades asks you to go on a walk, go on that walk.
(Laughter) It changed things. It really changed the way I was thinking about things.
To free ourselves from the filter bubbles, we can't just think about information filter bubbles, but also relationship and social filter bubbles.
You see, we human beings -- we're not nearly as smart as we think we are.
We don't generally make decisions intellectually.
We make them emotionally, intuitively, and then we use our big old brains to rationalize anything we want to rationalize.
We're not really like Vulcans like Mr. Spock, we're more like bold cowboys like Captain Kirk, or passionate idealists like Dr. McCoy.
OK, for those of y'all who prefer the new "Star Trek" crew, here you go.
(Laughter) JB: Don't forget the strong women!
JG: Come on, strong women. OK.
JB: All right.
John and I are both "Star Trek" fans.
What's not to love about a future with that kind of optimism?
JG: And having a good future in mind is a big deal -- very important.
And understanding what the problem is is very important.
But we have to do something.
So what do we do?
It's actually not that hard.
We have to add diversity to our lives -- not just information, but relationship diversity.
And by diversity, I mean big "D" diversity, not just racial and gender, which are very important, but also ...
diversity of age, like young and old; rural and urban; liberal and conservative; in the US, Democrat and Republican.
Now, one of the great examples of somebody freeing themselves from their filter bubbles and getting a more diverse life is, once again, next to me -- Joan.
JB: So the question is: Who among you has had relationships lost or harmed due to differences in politics, religion or whatever?
Raise your hands.
Yeah.
This year I have talked to so many people that have experienced that kind of loss.
I've seen tears well up in people's eyes as they talk about family members from whom they're estranged.
Living Room Conversations were designed to begin to heal political and personal differences.
They're simple conversations where two friends with different viewpoints each invite two friends for structured conversation, where everyone's agreed to some simple ground rules: curiosity, listening, respect, taking turns -- everything we learned in kindergarten, right?
Really easy.
So by the time you're talking about the topic you've agreed to talk about, you actually have the sense that, "You know, I kind of like this person," and you listen to each other differently.
That's kind of a human condition; we listen differently to people we care about.
And then there's reflection and possibly next steps.
This is a deep listening practice; it's never a debate.
And that's incredibly powerful.
These conversations in our own living rooms with people who have different viewpoints are an incredible adventure.
We rediscover that we can respect and even love people that are different from us.
And it's powerful.
JG: So, what are you curious about?
JB: What's the conversation you yearn to have?
JG: Let's do this together.
Together.
JB: Yes.
(Laughter) (Applause) JB and JG: Thank you.
What I'm going to do, in the spirit of collaborative creativity, is simply repeat many of the points that the three people before me have already made, but do them -- this is called "creative collaboration;" it's actually called "borrowing" -- but do it through a particular perspective, and that is to ask about the role of users and consumers in this emerging world of collaborative creativity that Jimmy and others have talked about.
Let me just ask you, to start with, this simple question: who invented the mountain bike?
Because traditional economic theory would say, well, the mountain bike was probably invented by some big bike corporation that had a big R&amp;D lab where they were thinking up new projects, and it came out of there. It didn't come from there.
Another answer might be, well, it came from a sort of lone genius working in his garage, who, working away on different kinds of bikes, comes up with a bike out of thin air.
It didn't come from there. The mountain bike came from users, came from young users, particularly a group in Northern California, who were frustrated with traditional racing bikes, which were those sort of bikes that Eddy Merckx rode, or your big brother, and they're very glamorous.
But also frustrated with the bikes that your dad rode, which sort of had big handlebars like that, and they were too heavy.
So, they got the frames from these big bikes, put them together with the gears from the racing bikes, got the brakes from motorcycles, and sort of mixed and matched various ingredients.
And for the first, I don't know, three to five years of their life, mountain bikes were known as "clunkers."
And they were just made in a community of bikers, mainly in Northern California.
And then one of these companies that was importing parts for the clunkers decided to set up in business, start selling them to other people, and gradually another company emerged out of that, Marin, and it probably was, I don't know, 10, maybe even 15, years, before the big bike companies realized there was a market.
Thirty years later, mountain bike sales and mountain bike equipment account for 65 percent of bike sales in America.
That's 58 billion dollars.
This is a category entirely created by consumers that would not have been created by the mainstream bike market because they couldn't see the need, the opportunity; they didn't have the incentive to innovate.
The one thing I think I disagree with about Yochai's presentation is when he said the Internet causes this distributive capacity for innovation to come alive.
It's when the Internet combines with these kinds of passionate pro-am consumers -- who are knowledgeable; they've got the incentive to innovate; they've got the tools; they want to -- that you get this kind of explosion of creative collaboration.
And out of that, you get the need for the kind of things that Jimmy was talking about, which is our new kinds of organization, or a better way to put it: how do we organize ourselves without organizations?
That's now possible; you don't need an organization to be organized, to achieve large and complex tasks, like innovating new software programs.
So this is a huge challenge to the way we think creativity comes about.
The traditional view, still enshrined in much of the way that we think about creativity -- in organizations, in government -- is that creativity is about special people: wear baseball caps the wrong way round, come to conferences like this, in special places, elite universities, R&amp;D labs in the forests, water, maybe special rooms in companies painted funny colors, you know, bean bags, maybe the odd table-football table.
Special people, special places, think up special ideas, then you have a pipeline that takes the ideas down to the waiting consumers, who are passive.
They can say "yes" or "no" to the invention.
That's the idea of creativity.
What's the policy recommendation out of that if you're in government, or you're running a large company?
More special people, more special places.
Build creative clusters in cities; create more R&amp;D parks, so on and so forth.
Expand the pipeline down to the consumers.
Well this view, I think, is increasingly wrong.
I think it's always been wrong, because I think always creativity has been highly collaborative, and it's probably been largely interactive.
But it's increasingly wrong, and one of the reasons it's wrong is that the ideas are flowing back up the pipeline.
The ideas are coming back from the consumers, and they're often ahead of the producers.
Why is that?
Well, one issue is that radical innovation, when you've got ideas that affect a large number of technologies or people, have a great deal of uncertainty attached to them.
The payoffs to innovation are greatest where the uncertainty is highest.
And when you get a radical innovation, it's often very uncertain how it can be applied.
The whole history of telephony is a story of dealing with that uncertainty.
The very first landline telephones, the inventors thought that they would be used for people to listen in to live performances from West End theaters.
When the mobile telephone companies invented SMS, they had no idea what it was for; it was only when that technology got into the hands of teenage users that they invented the use.
So the more radical the innovation, the more the uncertainty, the more you need innovation in use to work out what a technology is for.
All of our patents, our entire approach to patents and invention, is based on the idea that the inventor knows what the invention is for; we can say what it's for.
More and more, the inventors of things will not be able to say that in advance.
It will be worked out in use, in collaboration with users.
We like to think that invention is a sort of moment of creation: there is a moment of birth when someone comes up with an idea.
The truth is that most creativity is cumulative and collaborative; like Wikipedia, it develops over a long period of time.
The second reason why users are more and more important is that they are the source of big, disruptive innovations.
If you want to find the big new ideas, it's often difficult to find them in mainstream markets, in big organizations.
And just look inside large organizations and you'll see why that is so.
So, you're in a big corporation.
You're obviously keen to go up the corporate ladder.
Do you go into your board and say, "Look, I've got a fantastic idea for an embryonic product in a marginal market, with consumers we've never dealt with before, and I'm not sure it's going to have a big payoff, but it could be really, really big in the future?"
No, what you do, is you go in and you say, "I've got a fantastic idea for an incremental innovation to an existing product we sell through existing channels to existing users, and I can guarantee you get this much return out of it over the next three years."
Big corporations have an in-built tendency to reinforce past success.
They've got so much sunk in it that it's very difficult for them to spot emerging new markets. Emerging new markets, then, are the breeding grounds for passionate users.
Best example: who in the music industry, 30 years ago, would have said, "Yes, let's invent a musical form which is all about dispossessed black men in ghettos expressing their frustration with the world through a form of music that many people find initially quite difficult to listen to.
That sounds like a winner; we'll go with it."
(Laughter).
So what happens? Rap music is created by the users.
They do it on their own tapes, with their own recording equipment; they distribute it themselves.
30 years later, rap music is the dominant musical form of popular culture -- would never have come from the big companies.
Had to start -- this is the third point -- with these pro-ams.
This is the phrase that I've used in some stuff which I've done with a think tank in London called Demos, where we've been looking at these people who are amateurs -- i.e., they do it for the love of it -- but they want to do it to very high standards.
And across a whole range of fields -- from software, astronomy, natural sciences, vast areas of leisure and culture like kite-surfing, so on and so forth -- you find people who want to do things because they love it, but they want to do these things to very high standards.
They work at their leisure, if you like.
They take their leisure very seriously: they acquire skills; they invest time; they use technology that's getting cheaper -- it's not just the Internet: cameras, design technology, leisure technology, surfboards, so on and so forth.
Largely through globalization, a lot of this equipment has got a lot cheaper.
More knowledgeable consumers, more educated, more able to connect with one another, more able to do things together.
Consumption, in that sense, is an expression of their productive potential.
Why, we found, people were interested in this, is that at work they don't feel very expressed.
They don't feel as if they're doing something that really matters to them, so they pick up these kinds of activities.
This has huge organizational implications for very large areas of life.
Take astronomy as an example, which Yochai has already mentioned.
Twenty years ago, 30 years ago, only big professional astronomers with very big telescopes could see far into space.
And there's a big telescope in Northern England called Jodrell Bank, and when I was a kid, it was amazing, because the moon shots would take off, and this thing would move on rails.
And it was huge -- it was absolutely enormous.
Now, six amateur astronomers, working with the Internet, with Dobsonian digital telescopes -- which are pretty much open source -- with some light sensors developed over the last 10 years, the Internet -- they can do what Jodrell Bank could only do 30 years ago.
So here in astronomy, you have this vast explosion of new productive resources.
The users can be producers.
What does this mean, then, for our organizational landscape?
Well, just imagine a world, for the moment, divided into two camps.
Over here, you've got the old, traditional corporate model: special people, special places; patent it, push it down the pipeline to largely waiting, passive consumers.
Over here, let's imagine we've got Wikipedia, Linux, and beyond -- open source.
This is open; this is closed.
This is new; this is traditional.
Well, the first thing you can say, I think with certainty, is what Yochai has said already -- is there is a great big struggle between those two organizational forms.
These people over there will do everything they can to stop these kinds of organizations succeeding, because they're threatened by them.
And so the debates about copyright, digital rights, so on and so forth -- these are all about trying to stifle, in my view, these kinds of organizations.
What we're seeing is a complete corruption of the idea of patents and copyright.
Meant to be a way to incentivize invention, meant to be a way to orchestrate the dissemination of knowledge, they are increasingly being used by large companies to create thickets of patents to prevent innovation taking place.
Let me just give you two examples.
The first is: imagine yourself going to a venture capitalist and saying, "I've got a fantastic idea.
I've invented this brilliant new program that is much, much better than Microsoft Outlook."
Which venture capitalist in their right mind is going to give you any money to set up a venture competing with Microsoft, with Microsoft Outlook? No one.
That is why the competition with Microsoft is bound to come -- will only come -- from an open-source kind of project.
So, there is a huge competitive argument about sustaining the capacity for open-source and consumer-driven innovation, because it's one of the greatest competitive levers against monopoly.
There'll be huge professional arguments as well.
Because the professionals, over here in these closed organizations -- they might be academics; they might be programmers; they might be doctors; they might be journalists -- my former profession -- say, "No, no -- you can't trust these people over here."
When I started in journalism -- Financial Times, 20 years ago -- it was very, very exciting to see someone reading the newspaper.
And you'd kind of look over their shoulder on the Tube to see if they were reading your article.
Usually they were reading the share prices, and the bit of the paper with your article on was on the floor, or something like that, and you know, "For heaven's sake, what are they doing!
They're not reading my brilliant article!"
And we allowed users, readers, two places where they could contribute to the paper: the letters page, where they could write a letter in, and we would condescend to them, cut it in half, and print it three days later.
Or the op-ed page, where if they knew the editor -- had been to school with him, slept with his wife -- they could write an article for the op-ed page.
Those were the two places.
Shock, horror: now, the readers want to be writers and publishers.
That's not their role; they're supposed to read what we write.
But they don't want to be journalists. The journalists think that the bloggers want to be journalists; they don't want to be journalists; they just want to have a voice.
They want to, as Jimmy said, they want to have a dialogue, a conversation.
They want to be part of that flow of information.
What's happening there is that the whole domain of creativity is expanding.
So, there's going to be a tremendous struggle.
But, also, there's going to be tremendous movement from the open to the closed.
What you'll see, I think, is two things that are critical, and these, I think, are two challenges for the open movement.
The first is: can we really survive on volunteers?
If this is so critical, do we not need it funded, organized, supported in much more structured ways?
I think the idea of creating the Red Cross for information and knowledge is a fantastic idea, but can we really organize that, just on volunteers?
What kind of changes do we need in public policy and funding to make that possible?
What's the role of the BBC, for instance, in that world?
What should be the role of public policy?
And finally, what I think you will see is the intelligent, closed organizations moving increasingly in the open direction.
So it's not going to be a contest between two camps, but, in between them, you'll find all sorts of interesting places that people will occupy.
New organizational models coming about, mixing closed and open in tricky ways.
It won't be so clear-cut; it won't be Microsoft versus Linux -- there'll be all sorts of things in between.
And those organizational models, it turns out, are incredibly powerful, and the people who can understand them will be very, very successful.
Let me just give you one final example of what that means.
I was in Shanghai, in an office block built on what was a rice paddy five years ago -- one of the 2,500 skyscrapers they've built in Shanghai in the last 10 years.
And I was having dinner with this guy called Timothy Chan.
Timothy Chan set up an Internet business in 2000.
Didn't go into the Internet, kept his money, decided to go into computer games.
He runs a company called Shanda, which is the largest computer games company in China.
Nine thousand servers all over China, has 250 million subscribers.
At any one time, there are four million people playing one of his games.
How many people does he employ to service that population?
500 people.
Well, how can he service 250 million people from 500 employees?
Because basically, he doesn't service them.
He gives them a platform; he gives them some rules; he gives them the tools and then he kind of orchestrates the conversation; he orchestrates the action.
But actually, a lot of the content is created by the users themselves.
And it creates a kind of stickiness between the community and the company which is really, really powerful.
The best measure of that: so you go into one of his games, you create a character that you develop in the course of the game.
If, for some reason, your credit card bounces, or there's some other problem, you lose your character.
You've got two options.
One option: you can create a new character, right from scratch, but with none of the history of your player.
That costs about 100 dollars.
Or you can get on a plane, fly to Shanghai, queue up outside Shanda's offices -- cost probably 600, 700 dollars -- and reclaim your character, get your history back.
Every morning, there are 600 people queuing outside their offices to reclaim these characters. (Laughter) So this is about companies built on communities, that provide communities with tools, resources, platforms in which they can share.
He's not open source, but it's very, very powerful.
So here is one of the challenges, I think, for people like me, who do a lot of work with government.
If you're a games company, and you've got a million players in your game, you only need one percent of them to be co-developers, contributing ideas, and you've got a development workforce of 10,000 people.
Imagine you could take all the children in education in Britain, and one percent of them were co-developers of education.
What would that do to the resources available to the education system?
Or if you got one percent of the patients in the NHS to, in some sense, be co-producers of health.
The reason why -- despite all the efforts to cut it down, to constrain it, to hold it back -- why these open models will still start emerging with tremendous force, is that they multiply our productive resources.
And one of the reasons they do that is that they turn users into producers, consumers into designers.
Thank you very much.
Today I'm going to talk to you about the problem of other minds.
And the problem I'm going to talk about is not the familiar one from philosophy, which is, "How can we know whether other people have minds?"
That is, maybe you have a mind, and everyone else is just a really convincing robot.
So that's a problem in philosophy, but for today's purposes I'm going to assume that many people in this audience have a mind, and that I don't have to worry about this.
There is a second problem that is maybe even more familiar to us as parents and teachers and spouses and novelists, which is, "Why is it so hard to know what somebody else wants or believes?"
Or perhaps, more relevantly, "Why is it so hard to change what somebody else wants or believes?"
I think novelists put this best.
Like Philip Roth, who said, "And yet, what are we to do about this terribly significant business of other people?
So ill equipped are we all, to envision one another's interior workings and invisible aims."
So as a teacher and as a spouse, this is, of course, a problem I confront every day.
But as a scientist, I'm interested in a different problem of other minds, and that is the one I'm going to introduce to you today.
And that problem is, "How is it so easy to know other minds?"
So to start with an illustration, you need almost no information, one snapshot of a stranger, to guess what this woman is thinking, or what this man is.
And put another way, the crux of the problem is the machine that we use for thinking about other minds, our brain, is made up of pieces, brain cells, that we share with all other animals, with monkeys and mice and even sea slugs.
And yet, you put them together in a particular network, and what you get is the capacity to write Romeo and Juliet.
Or to say, as Alan Greenspan did, "I know you think you understand what you thought I said, but I'm not sure you realize that what you heard is not what I meant."
(Laughter) So, the job of my field of cognitive neuroscience is to stand with these ideas, one in each hand.
And to try to understand how you can put together simple units, simple messages over space and time, in a network, and get this amazing human capacity to think about minds.
So I'm going to tell you three things about this today.
Obviously the whole project here is huge.
And I'm going to tell you just our first few steps about the discovery of a special brain region for thinking about other people's thoughts.
Some observations on the slow development of this system as we learn how to do this difficult job.
And then finally, to show that some of the differences between people, in how we judge others, can be explained by differences in this brain system.
So first, the first thing I want to tell you is that there is a brain region in the human brain, in your brains, whose job it is to think about other people's thoughts.
This is a picture of it.
It's called the Right Temporo-Parietal Junction.
It's above and behind your right ear.
And this is the brain region you used when you saw the pictures I showed you, or when you read Romeo and Juliet or when you tried to understand Alan Greenspan.
And you don't use it for solving any other kinds of logical problems.
So this brain region is called the Right TPJ.
And this picture shows the average activation in a group of what we call typical human adults.
They're MIT undergraduates.
(Laughter) The second thing I want to say about this brain system is that although we human adults are really good at understanding other minds, we weren't always that way.
It takes children a long time to break into the system.
I'm going to show you a little bit of that long, extended process.
The first thing I'm going to show you is a change between age three and five, as kids learn to understand that somebody else can have beliefs that are different from their own.
So I'm going to show you a five-year-old who is getting a standard kind of puzzle that we call the false belief task.
Rebecca Saxe (Video): This is the first pirate. His name is Ivan.
And you know what pirates really like?
Child: What? RS: Pirates really like cheese sandwiches.
Child: Cheese? I love cheese!
RS: Yeah. So Ivan has this cheese sandwich, and he says, "Yum yum yum yum yum!
I really love cheese sandwiches."
And Ivan puts his sandwich over here, on top of the pirate chest.
And Ivan says, "You know what? I need a drink with my lunch."
And so Ivan goes to get a drink.
And while Ivan is away the wind comes, and it blows the sandwich down onto the grass.
And now, here comes the other pirate.
This pirate is called Joshua.
And Joshua also really loves cheese sandwiches.
So Joshua has a cheese sandwich and he says, "Yum yum yum yum yum! I love cheese sandwiches."
And he puts his cheese sandwich over here on top of the pirate chest.
Child: So, that one is his.
RS: That one is Joshua's. That's right.
Child: And then his went on the ground.
RS: That's exactly right.
Child: So he won't know which one is his.
RS: Oh. So now Joshua goes off to get a drink.
Ivan comes back and he says, "I want my cheese sandwich."
So which one do you think Ivan is going to take?
Child: I think he is going to take that one.
RS: Yeah, you think he's going to take that one? All right. Let's see.
Oh yeah, you were right. He took that one.
So that's a five-year-old who clearly understands that other people can have false beliefs and what the consequences are for their actions.
Now I'm going to show you a three-year-old who got the same puzzle.
RS: And Ivan says, "I want my cheese sandwich."
Which sandwich is he going to take?
Do you think he's going to take that one? Let's see what happens.
Let's see what he does. Here comes Ivan.
And he says, "I want my cheese sandwich."
And he takes this one.
Uh-oh. Why did he take that one?
Child: His was on the grass.
So the three-year-old does two things differently.
First, he predicts Ivan will take the sandwich that's really his.
And second, when he sees Ivan taking the sandwich where he left his, where we would say he's taking that one because he thinks it's his, the three-year-old comes up with another explanation: He's not taking his own sandwich because he doesn't want it, because now it's dirty, on the ground.
So that's why he's taking the other sandwich.
Now of course, development doesn't end at five.
And we can see the continuation of this process of learning to think about other people's thoughts by upping the ante and asking children now, not for an action prediction, but for a moral judgment.
So first I'm going to show you the three-year-old again.
RS.: So is Ivan being mean and naughty for taking Joshua's sandwich?
Child: Yeah.
RS: Should Ivan get in trouble for taking Joshua's sandwich?
Child: Yeah.
So it's maybe not surprising he thinks it was mean of Ivan to take Joshua's sandwich, since he thinks Ivan only took Joshua's sandwich to avoid having to eat his own dirty sandwich.
But now I'm going to show you the five-year-old.
Remember the five-year-old completely understood why Ivan took Joshua's sandwich.
RS: Was Ivan being mean and naughty for taking Joshua's sandwich?
Child: Um, yeah.
And so, it is not until age seven that we get what looks more like an adult response.
RS: Should Ivan get in trouble for taking Joshua's sandwich?
Child: No, because the wind should get in trouble.
He says the wind should get in trouble for switching the sandwiches.
(Laughter) And now what we've started to do in my lab is to put children into the brain scanner and ask what's going on in their brain as they develop this ability to think about other people's thoughts.
So the first thing is that in children we see this same brain region, the Right TPJ, being used while children are thinking about other people.
But it's not quite like the adult brain.
So whereas in the adults, as I told you, this brain region is almost completely specialized -- it does almost nothing else except for thinking about other people's thoughts -- in children it's much less so, when they are age five to eight, the age range of the children I just showed you.
And actually if we even look at eight to 11-year-olds, getting into early adolescence, they still don't have quite an adult-like brain region.
And so, what we can see is that over the course of childhood and even into adolescence, both the cognitive system, our mind's ability to think about other minds, and the brain system that supports it are continuing, slowly, to develop.
But of course, as you're probably aware, even in adulthood, people differ from one another in how good they are at thinking of other minds, how often they do it and how accurately.
And so what we wanted to know was, could differences among adults in how they think about other people's thoughts be explained in terms of differences in this brain region?
So, the first thing that we did is we gave adults a version of the pirate problem that we gave to the kids.
And I'm going to give that to you now.
So Grace and her friend are on a tour of a chemical factory, and they take a break for coffee.
And Grace's friend asks for some sugar in her coffee.
Grace goes to make the coffee and finds by the coffee a pot containing a white powder, which is sugar.
But the powder is labeled "Deadly Poison," so Grace thinks that the powder is a deadly poison.
And she puts it in her friend's coffee.
And her friend drinks the coffee, and is fine.
How many people think it was morally permissible for Grace to put the powder in the coffee?
Okay. Good. (Laughter) So we ask people, how much should Grace be blamed in this case, which we call a failed attempt to harm?
And we can compare that to another case, where everything in the real world is the same.
The powder is still sugar, but what's different is what Grace thinks.
Now she thinks the powder is sugar.
And perhaps unsurprisingly, if Grace thinks the powder is sugar and puts it in her friend's coffee, people say she deserves no blame at all.
Whereas if she thinks the powder was poison, even though it's really sugar, now people say she deserves a lot of blame, even though what happened in the real world was exactly the same.
And in fact, they say she deserves more blame in this case, the failed attempt to harm, than in another case, which we call an accident.
Where Grace thought the powder was sugar, because it was labeled "sugar" and by the coffee machine, but actually the powder was poison.
So even though when the powder was poison, the friend drank the coffee and died, people say Grace deserves less blame in that case, when she innocently thought it was sugar, than in the other case, where she thought it was poison and no harm occurred.
People, though, disagree a little bit about exactly how much blame Grace should get in the accident case.
Some people think she should deserve more blame, and other people less.
And what I'm going to show you is what happened when we look inside the brains of people while they're making that judgment.
So what I'm showing you, from left to right, is how much activity there was in this brain region, and from top to bottom, how much blame people said that Grace deserved.
And what you can see is, on the left when there was very little activity in this brain region, people paid little attention to her innocent belief and said she deserved a lot of blame for the accident.
Whereas on the right, where there was a lot of activity, people paid a lot more attention to her innocent belief, and said she deserved a lot less blame for causing the accident.
So that's good, but of course what we'd rather is have a way to interfere with function in this brain region, and see if we could change people's moral judgment.
And we do have such a tool.
It's called Trans-Cranial Magnetic Stimulation, or TMS.
This is a tool that lets us pass a magnetic pulse through somebody's skull, into a small region of their brain, and temporarily disorganize the function of the neurons in that region.
So I'm going to show you a demo of this.
First, I'm going to show you that this is a magnetic pulse.
I'm going to show you what happens when you put a quarter on the machine.
When you hear clicks, we're turning the machine on.
So now I'm going to apply that same pulse to my brain, to the part of my brain that controls my hand.
So there is no physical force, just a magnetic pulse.
Woman (Video): Ready, Rebecca? RS: Yes.
Okay, so it causes a small involuntary contraction in my hand by putting a magnetic pulse in my brain.
And we can use that same pulse, now applied to the RTPJ, to ask if we can change people's moral judgments.
So these are the judgments I showed you before, people's normal moral judgments.
And then we can apply TMS to the RTPJ and ask how people's judgments change.
And the first thing is, people can still do this task overall.
So their judgments of the case when everything was fine remain the same. They say she deserves no blame.
But in the case of a failed attempt to harm, where Grace thought that it was poison, although it was really sugar, people now say it was more okay, she deserves less blame for putting the powder in the coffee.
And in the case of the accident, where she thought that it was sugar, but it was really poison and so she caused a death, people say that it was less okay, she deserves more blame.
So what I've told you today is that people come, actually, especially well equipped to think about other people's thoughts.
We have a special brain system that lets us think about what other people are thinking.
This system takes a long time to develop, slowly throughout the course of childhood and into early adolescence.
And even in adulthood, differences in this brain region can explain differences among adults in how we think about and judge other people.
But I want to give the last word back to the novelists, and to Philip Roth, who ended by saying, "The fact remains that getting people right is not what living is all about anyway.
It's getting them wrong that is living.
Getting them wrong and wrong and wrong, and then on careful reconsideration, getting them wrong again."
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So, I have a question. When you start talking about using magnetic pulses to change people's moral judgments, that sounds alarming.
(Laughter) Please tell me that you're not taking phone calls from the Pentagon, say.
RS: I'm not.
I mean, they're calling, but I'm not taking the call.
(Laughter) CA: They really are calling?
So then seriously, you must lie awake at night sometimes wondering where this work leads.
I mean, you're clearly an incredible human being, but someone could take this knowledge and in some future not-torture chamber, do acts that people here might be worried about.
RS: Yeah, we worry about this.
So, there's a couple of things to say about TMS.
One is that you can't be TMSed without knowing it.
So it's not a surreptitious technology.
It's quite hard, actually, to get those very small changes.
The changes I showed you are impressive to me because of what they tell us about the function of the brain, but they're small on the scale of the moral judgments that we actually make.
And what we changed was not people's moral judgments when they're deciding what to do, when they're making action choices.
We changed their ability to judge other people's actions.
And so, I think of what I'm doing not so much as studying the defendant in a criminal trial, but studying the jury.
CA: Is your work going to lead to any recommendations in education, to perhaps bring up a generation of kids able to make fairer moral judgments?
RS: That's one of the idealistic hopes.
The whole research program here of studying the distinctive parts of the human brain is brand new.
Until recently, what we knew about the brain were the things that any other animal's brain could do too, so we could study it in animal models.
We knew how brains see, and how they control the body and how they hear and sense.
And the whole project of understanding how brains do the uniquely human things -- learn language and abstract concepts, and thinking about other people's thoughts -- that's brand new.
And we don't know yet what the implications will be of understanding it.
CA: So I've got one last question. There is this thing called the hard problem of consciousness, that puzzles a lot of people.
The notion that you can understand why a brain works, perhaps.
But why does anyone have to feel anything?
Why does it seem to require these beings who sense things for us to operate?
You're a brilliant young neuroscientist.
I mean, what chances do you think there are that at some time in your career, someone, you or someone else, is going to come up with some paradigm shift in understanding what seems an impossible problem?
RS: I hope they do. And I think they probably won't.
CA: Why?
RS: It's not called the hard problem of consciousness for nothing.
(Laughter) CA: That's a great answer. Rebecca Saxe, thank you very much. That was fantastic.
(Applause)
More than 3,000 years ago, a flower began to appear in remedies in Ancient Egyptian medical texts.
Across the Mediterranean, the ancient Minoans likely found ways to use the same plant for its high.
Both ancient civilizations were on to something— opium, an extract of the poppy in question, can both induce pleasure and reduce pain.
Though opium has remained in use ever since, it wasn’t until the 19th century that one of its chemical compounds, morphine, was identified and isolated for medical use.
Morphine, codeine, and other substances made directly from the poppy are called opiates.
In the 20th century, drug companies created a slew of synthetic substances similar to these opiates, including heroin, hydrocodone, oxycodone, and fentanyl.
Whether synthetic or derived from opium, these compounds are collectively known as opioids.
Synthetic or natural, legal or illicit, opioid drugs are very effective painkillers, but they are also highly addictive.
In the 1980s and 90s, pharmaceutical companies began to market opioid painkillers aggressively, actively downplaying their addictive potential to both the medical community and the public.
The number of opioid painkillers prescriptions skyrocketed, and so did cases of opioid addiction, beginning a crisis that continues today.
To understand why opioids are so addictive, it helps to trace how these drugs affect the human body from the first dose, through repeated use, to what happens when long-term use stops.
Each of these drugs has slightly different chemistry, but all act on the body’s opioid system by binding to opioid receptors in the brain.
The body’s endorphins temper pain signals by binding to these receptors, and opioid drugs bind much more strongly, for longer.
So opioid drugs can manage much more severe pain than endorphins can.
Opioid receptors also influence everything from mood to normal bodily functions.
With these functions, too, opioids’ binding strength and durability mean their effects are more pronounced and widespread than those of the body’s natural signaling molecules.
When a drug binds to opioid receptors, it triggers the release of dopamine, which is linked to feelings of pleasure and may be responsible for the sense of euphoria that characterizes an opioid high.
At the same time, opioids suppress the release of noradrenaline, which influences wakefulness, breathing, digestion, and blood pressure.
A therapeutic dose decreases noradrenaline enough to cause side effects like constipation.
At higher doses opioids can decrease heart and breathing rates to dangerous levels, causing loss of consciousness and even death.
Over time, the body starts to develop a tolerance for opioids.
It may decrease its number of opioid receptors, or the receptors may become less responsive.
To experience the same release of dopamine and resulting mood effects as before, people have to take larger and larger doses— a cycle that leads to physical dependence and addiction.
As people take more opioids to compensate for tolerance, noradrenaline levels become lower and lower, to a point that could impact basic bodily functions.
The body compensates by increasing its number of noradrenaline receptors so it can detect much smaller amounts of noradrenaline.
This increased sensitivity to noradrenaline allows the body to continue functioning normally— in fact, it becomes dependent on opioids to maintain the new balance.
When someone who is physically dependent on opioids stops taking them abruptly, that balance is disrupted.
Noradrenaline levels can increase within a day of ceasing opioid use.
But the body takes much longer to get rid of all the extra noradrenaline receptors it made.
That means there’s a period of time when the body is too sensitive to noradrenaline.
This oversensitivity causes withdrawal symptoms, including muscle aches, stomach pains, fever, and vomiting.
Though temporary, opioid withdrawal can be incredibly debilitating.
In serious cases, someone in withdrawal can be violently ill for days or even weeks.
People who are addicted to opioids aren't necessarily using the drugs to get high anymore, but rather to avoid being sick.
Many risk losing wages or even jobs while in withdrawal, or may not have anyone to take care of them during withdrawal.
If someone goes back to using opioids later, they can be at particularly high risk for overdose, because what would have been a standard dose while their tolerance was high, can now be lethal.
Since 1980, accidental deaths from opioid overdose have grown exponentially in the United States, and opioid addictions have also exploded around the world.
While opioid painkiller prescriptions are becoming more closely regulated, cases of overdose and addiction are still increasing, especially among younger people.
Many of the early cases of addiction were middle-aged people who became addicted to painkillers they had been prescribed, or received from friends and family members with prescriptions.
Today, young people are often introduced to prescription opioid drugs in those ways but move on to heroin or illicit synthetic opioids that are cheaper and easier to come by.
Beyond tighter regulation of opioid painkillers, what can we do to reverse the growing rates of addiction and overdose?
A drug called naloxone is currently our best defense against overdose.
Naloxone binds to opioid receptors but doesn’t activate them.
It blocks other opioids from binding to the receptors, and even knocks them off the receptors to reverse an overdose.
Opioid addiction is rarely a stand-alone illness; frequently, people with opioid dependence are also struggling with a mental health condition.
There are both inpatient and outpatient programs that combine medication, health services, and psychotherapy.
But many of these programs are very expensive, and the more affordable options can have long waiting lists.
They also often require complete detoxification from opioids before beginning treatment.
Both the withdrawal period and the common months-long stay in a facility can be impossible for people who risk losing jobs and housing in that timeframe.
Opioid maintenance programs aim to address some of these obstacles and eliminate opioid abuse using a combination of medication and behavior therapy.
These programs avoid withdrawal symptoms with drugs that bind to opioid receptors but don’t have the psychoactive effects of painkillers, heroin, and other commonly abused opioids.
Methadone and buprenorphine are the primary opioid maintenance drugs available today, but doctors need a special waiver to prescribe them— even though no specific training or certification is required to prescribe opioid painkillers.
Buprenorphine can be so scarce that there’s even a growing black market for it.
There’s still a long way to go with combating opioid addiction, but there are great resources for making sense of the treatment options.
If you or someone you know is struggling with opioid use in the United States, the Department of Health and Human Services operates a helpline: 800-662-4357 and a database of more than 14,000 substance abuse facilities in the US: www.hhs.gov/opioids
Lord Sun dawns on the day called 7-Monkey, his fingers slowly spreading a rosy sheen that mixes softly with smoke rising from Tenochtitlan’s many hearth fires.
The midwife, Xoquauhtli, has a difficult choice to make.
A momentous shift from rainy season to dry season is underway.
All summer, the gods have kept the people fed with corn, but the fertile summer months are disappearing.
This day occurs during the festival that marks the shift between the summer season, when the gods feed the people, and the winter season, when the people feed the gods in return.
Xoquauhtli owes a debt to her patron, Teteoinnan, the female warrior goddess at the center of this festival.
Teteoinnan wages war both on women’s battlefields of birth and in men’s battles with Tenochtilan’s enemies.
She must be kept happy or she will bring bad luck.
The midwife should participate in the festival today, but one of her patients could go into labor any minute.
Xoquauhtli decides to check on her patient first.
The expecting mother hasn’t worked too hard, chewed gum, or lifted heavy things.
Her family is taking good care of her.
Surely Xoquauhtli can take a little time to honor her goddess.
She leaves her apprentice in charge and heads to the center of the city.
Along the way, she sees women sweeping the roads and hanging gourds in preparation for the festival.
Finally, she reaches the Great Pyramid.
On top are two temples: the north, where rituals honor the rain god in the summer, and the south one is where rituals honor the war god in the winter.
On the equinox, the sun rises between the two sides.
The ceremony begins with a mock battle between the midwives and the other physicians.
Xoquauhtli’s team battles heartily, throwing nochtles, marigolds, and balls made of reed and moss.
They joke, call their rivals names, and laugh.
But then, a girl comes running with a message for Xoquauhtli.
Her patient is in labor!
She hurries back to the house.
All the old women from the extended family have already gathered for the birth— their experience is very valuable if anything goes wrong.
She readies herself with a prayer praising her most important tools, her fingers.
Then she doses the patient with cihuapatli to help expel the baby, massages her in the sweathouse, and rubs her stomach with tobacco.
Offering Teteoinnan a short prayer, she urges her patient to act like a warrior.
A strong baby girl slips into her waiting hands and the old women shout triumphant cries.
Xoquauhtli takes a few drops of water from a jade bowl, breaths on them, and places them on the baby’s tiny tongue.
She calls her a precious greenstone, a little warrior, and tells her how the Lord and Lady of the Ninth Sky breathed life into her, sending her to this place of burden and torment.
She then turns to the new mother, praising her, telling her she acted like an eagle warrior, a jaguar warrior.
By the time they finish, it’s late, and the flames of the fire have died down.
Xoquauhtli piles the remaining hot coals in the center of the hearth, stoking them to keep them going.
She lays the baby in a woven basket, head facing the warming fire.
This will warm her tonalli, an important “soul” center in the body central to health and well-being.
It’s almost midnight— if Xoquauhtli hurries, she can get back to the temple for the culmination of the festival.
She makes her way to the city center, where a priest carries a woman on his back to the top of the pyramid.
To begin the new season and feed the gods, she will be beheaded, symbolizing how corn is cut in the fields.
Afterward, she will be reborn as Lady Teteoinnan, and preside over the induction of new warriors.
These are grim economic times, fellow TEDsters, grim economic times indeed.
And so, I would like to cheer you up with one of the great, albeit largely unknown, commercial success stories of the past 20 years.
Comparable, in its own very peculiar way, to the achievements of Microsoft or Google.
And it's an industry which has bucked the current recession with equanimity.
I refer to organized crime.
Now organized crime has been around for a very long time, I hear you say, and these would be wise words, indeed.
But in the last two decades, it has experienced an unprecedented expansion, now accounting for roughly 15 percent of the world's GDP.
I like to call it the Global Shadow Economy, or McMafia, for short.
So what triggered this extraordinary growth in cross-border crime?
Well, of course, there is globalization, technology, communications, all that stuff, which we'll talk about a little bit later.
But first, I would like to take you back to this event: the collapse of communism.
All across Eastern Europe, a most momentous episode in our post-war history.
Now it's time for full disclosure.
This event meant a great deal to me personally.
I had started smuggling books across the Iron Curtain to Democratic opposition groups in Eastern Europe, like Solidarity in Poland, when I was in my teens.
I then started writing about Eastern Europe, and eventually I became the BBC's chief correspondent for the region, which is what I was doing in 1989.
And so when 425 million people finally won the right to choose their own governments, I was ecstatic, but I was also a touch worried about some of the nastier things lurking behind the wall.
It wasn't long, for example, before ethnic nationalism reared its bloody head in Yugoslavia.
And amongst the chaos, amidst the euphoria, it took me a little while to understand that some of the people who had wielded power before 1989, in Eastern Europe, continued to do so after the revolutions there.
Obviously there were characters like this.
But there were also some more unexpected people who played a critical role in what was going on in Eastern Europe.
Like this character. Remember these guys?
They used to win the gold medals in weightlifting and wrestling, every four years in the Olympics, and they were the great celebrities of communism, with a fabulous lifestyle to go with it.
They used to get great apartments in the center of town, casual sex on tap, and they could travel to the West very freely, which was a great luxury at the time.
It may come as a surprise, but they played a critical role in the emergence of the market economy in Eastern Europe.
Or as I like to call them, they are the midwives of capitalism.
Here are some of those same weightlifters after their 1989 makeover.
Now in Bulgaria -- this photograph was taken in Bulgaria -- when communism collapsed all over Eastern Europe, it wasn't just communism; it was the state that collapsed as well.
That means your police force wasn't working.
The court system wasn't functioning properly.
So what was a business man in the brave new world of East European capitalism going to do to make sure that his contracts would be honored?
Well, he would turn to people who were called, rather prosaically by sociologists, privatized law enforcement agencies.
We prefer to know them as the mafia.
And in Bulgaria, the mafia was soon joined with 14,000 people who were sacked from their jobs in the security services between 1989 and 1991.
Now, when your state is collapsing, your economy is heading south at a rate of knots, the last people you want coming on to the labor market are 14,000 men and women whose chief skills are surveillance, are smuggling, building underground networks and killing people.
But that's what happened all over Eastern Europe.
Now, when I was working in the 1990s, I spent most of the time covering the appalling conflict in Yugoslavia.
And I couldn't help notice that the people who were perpetrating the appalling atrocities, the paramilitary organizations, were actually the same people running the organized criminal syndicates.
And I came to think that behind the violence lay a sinister criminal enterprise.
And so I resolved to travel around the world examining this global criminal underworld by talking to policemen, by talking to victims, by talking to consumers of illicit goods and services.
But above all else, by talking to the gangsters themselves.
And the Balkans was a fabulous place to start.
Why? Well of course there was the issue of law and order collapsing, but also, as they say in the retail trade, it's location, location, location.
And what I noticed at the beginning of my research that the Balkans had turned into a vast transit zone for illicit goods and services coming from all over the world.
Heroin, cocaine, women being trafficked into prostitution and precious minerals.
And where were they heading?
The European Union, which by now was beginning to reap the benefits of globalization, transforming it into the most affluent consumer market in history, eventually comprising some 500 million people.
And a significant minority of those 500 million people like to spend some of their leisure time and spare cash sleeping with prostitutes, sticking 50 Euro notes up their nose and employing illegal migrant laborers.
Now, organized crime in a globalizing world operates in the same way as any other business.
It has zones of production, like Afghanistan and Columbia.
It has zones of distribution, like Mexico and the Balkans.
And then, of course, it has zones of consumption, like the European Union, Japan and of course, the United States.
The zones of production and distribution tend to lie in the developing world, and they are often threatened by appalling violence and bloodshed.
Take Mexico, for example.
Six thousand people killed there in the last 18 months as a direct consequence of the cocaine trade.
But what about the Democratic Republic of Congo?
Since 1998, five million people have died there.
It's not a conflict you read about much in the newspapers, but it's the biggest conflict on this planet since the Second World War.
And why is it? Because mafias from all around the world cooperate with local paramilitaries in order to seize the supplies of the rich mineral resources of the region.
In the year 2000, 80 percent of the world's coltan was sourced to the killing fields of the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.
Now, coltan you will find in almost every mobile phone, in almost every laptop and games console.
The Congolese war lords were selling this stuff to the mafia in exchange for weapons, and the mafia would then sell it on to Western markets.
And it is this Western desire to consume that is the primary driver of international organized crime.
Now, let me show you some of my friends in action, caught conveniently on film by the Italian police, and smuggling duty-not-paid cigarettes.
Now, cigarettes out the factory gate are very cheap.
The European Union then imposes the highest taxes on them in the world.
So if you can smuggle them into the E.U., there are very handsome profits to be made, and I want to show you this to demonstrate the type of resources available to these groups.
This boat is worth one million Euros when it's new.
And it's the fastest thing on European waters.
From 1994, for seven years, 20 of these boats made the trip across the Adriatic, from Montenegro to Italy, every single night.
And as a consequence of this trade, Britain alone lost eight billion dollars in revenue.
And instead that money went to underwrite the wars in Yugoslavia and line the pockets of unscrupulous individuals.
Now Italian police, when this trade started, had just two boats which could go at the same speed.
And this is very important, because the only way you can catch these guys is if they run out of gas.
Sometimes the gangsters would bring with them women being trafficked into prostitution, and if the police intervened, they would hurl the women into the sea so that the police had to go and save them from drowning, rather than chasing the bad guys.
So I have shown you this to demonstrate how many boats, how many vessels it takes to catch one of these guys.
And the answer is six vessels.
And remember, 20 of these speed boats were coming across the Adriatic every single night.
So what were these guys doing with all the money they were making?
Well, this is where we come to globalization, because that was not just the deregulation of global trade.
It was the liberalization of international financial markets.
And boy, did that make it easy for the money launderers.
The last two decades have been the champagne era for dirty lucre.
In the 1990s, we saw financial centers around the world competing for their business, and there was simply no effective mechanism to prevent money laundering.
And a lot of licit banks were also happy to accept deposits from very dubious sources without questions being asked.
But at the heart of this, is the offshore banking network.
Now these things are an essential part of the money laundering parade, and if you want to do something about illegal tax evasion and transnational organized crime, money laundering, you have to get rid of them.
On a positive note, we at last have someone in the White House who has consistently spoken out against these corrosive entities.
And if anyone is concerned about what I believe is the necessity for new legislation, regulation, effective regulation, I say, let's take a look at Bernie Madoff, who is now going to be spending the rest of his life in jail.
Bernie Madoff stole 65 billion dollars.
That puts him up there on the Olympus of gangsters with the Colombian cartels and the major Russian crime syndicates, but he did this for decades in the very heart of Wall Street, and no regulator picked up on it.
So how many other Madoffs are there on Wall Street or in the city of London, fleecing ordinary folk and money laundering?
Well I can tell you, it's quite a few of them.
Let me go on to the 101 of international organized crime now.
And that is narcotics. Our second marijuana farm photograph for the morning.
This one, however, is in central British Columbia where I photographed it.
It's one of the tens of thousands of mom-and-pop grow-ops in B.C.
which ensure that over five percent of the province's GDP is accounted for by this trade.
Now, I was taken by inspector Brian Cantera, of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, to a cavernous warehouse east of Vancouver to see some of the goods which are regularly confiscated by the RCMP from the smugglers who are sending it, of course, down south to the United States where there is an insatiable market for B.C. Bud, as it's called, in part because it's marketed as organic, which of course goes down very well in California.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, even by the police's admission, this makes not a dent in the profits, really, of the major exporters.
Since the beginning of globalization, the global narcotics market has expanded enormously.
There has, however, been no concomitant increase in the resources available to police forces.
This, however, may all be about to change, because something very strange is going on.
The United Nations recognized earlier this -- it was last month actually -- that Canada has become a key area of distribution and production of ecstasy and other synthetic drugs.
Interestingly, the market share of heroin and cocaine is going down, because the pills are getting ever better at reproducing their highs.
Now that is a game changer, because it shifts production away from the developing world and into the Western world.
When that happens, it is a trend which is set to overwhelm our policing capacity in the West.
The drugs policy which we've had in place for 40 years is long overdue for a very serious rethink, in my opinion.
Now, the recession.
Well, organized crime has already adapted very well to the recession.
Not surprising, the most opportunistic industry in the whole world.
And it has no rules to its regulatory system.
Except, of course, it has two business risks: arrest by law enforcement, which is, frankly, the least of their worries, and competition from other groups, i.e. a bullet in the back of the head.
What they've done is they've shifted their operations.
People don't smoke as much dope, or visit prostitutes quite so frequently during a recession.
And so instead, they have invaded financial and corporate crime in a big way, but above all, two sectors, and that is counterfeit goods and cybercrime.
And it's been terribly successful.
I would like to introduce you to Mr. Pringle.
Or perhaps I should say, more accurately, Señor Pringle.
I was introduced to this bit of kit by a Brazilian cybercriminal.
We sat in a car on the Avenue Paulista in São Paulo, together.
Hooked it up to my laptop, and within about five minutes he had penetrated the computer security system of a major Brazilian bank.
It's really not that difficult.
And it's actually much easier because the fascinating thing about cybercrime is that it's not so much the technology.
The key to cybercrime is what we call social engineering.
Or to use the technical term for it, there's one born every minute.
You would not believe how easy it is to persuade people to do things with their computers which are objectively not in their interest.
And it was very soon when the cybercriminals learned that the quickest way to do this, of course, the quickest way to a person's wallet is through the promise of sex and love.
I expect some of you remember the ILOVEYOU virus, one of the very great worldwide viruses that came.
I was very fortunate when the ILOVEYOU virus came out, because the first person I received it from was an ex-girlfriend of mine.
Now, she harbored all sorts of sentiments and emotions towards me at the time, but love was not amongst them.
(Laughter) And so as soon as I saw this drop into my inbox, I dispatched it hastily to the recycle bin and spared myself a very nasty infection.
So, cybercrime, do watch out for it.
One thing that we do know that the Internet is doing is the Internet is assisting these guys.
These are mosquitos who carry the malarial parasite which infests our blood when the mosy has had a free meal at our expense.
Now, Artesunate is a very effective drug at destroying the parasite in the early days of infection.
But over the past year or so, researchers in Cambodia have discovered that what's happening is the malarial parasite is developing a resistance.
And they fear that the reason why it's developing a resistance is because Cambodians can't afford the drugs on the commercial market, and so they buy it from the Internet.
And these pills contain only low doses of the active ingredient.
Which is why the parasite is beginning to develop a resistance.
The reason I say this is because we have to know that organized crime impacts all sorts of areas of our lives.
You don't have to sleep with prostitutes or take drugs in order to have a relationship with organized crime.
They affect our bank accounts.
They affect our communications, our pension funds.
They even affect the food that we eat and our governments.
This is no longer an issue of Sicilians from Palermo and New York.
There is no romance involved with gangsters in the 21st Century.
This is a mighty industry, and it creates instability and violence wherever it goes.
It is a major economic force and we need to take it very, very seriously.
It's been a privilege talking to you.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
A mountain separating two lakes.
A room papered floor to ceiling with bridal satins.
The lid of an immense snuffbox.
These seemingly unrelated images take us on a tour of a sperm whale’s head in Herman Melville’s "Moby Dick."
On the surface, the book is the story of Captain Ahab’s hunt for revenge against Moby Dick, the white whale who bit off his leg.
But though the book features pirates, typhoons, high-speed chases, and giant squid, you shouldn’t expect a conventional seafaring adventure.
Instead, it’s a multilayered exploration of not only the intimate details of life aboard a whaling ship, but also subjects from across human and natural history, by turns playful and tragic, humorous, and urgent.
The narrator guiding us through these explorations is a common sailor called Ishmael.
Ishmael starts out telling his own story as he prepares to escape the “damp and drizzly November in [his] soul” by going to sea.
But after he befriends the Pacific Islander Queequeg and joins Ahab’s crew aboard the Pequod, Ishmael becomes more of an omniscient guide for the reader than a traditional character.
While Ahab obsesses over revenge and first mate Starbuck tries to reason with him, Ishmael takes us on his own quest for meaning throughout “the whole universe, not excluding its suburbs.” In his telling, life’s biggest questions loom large, even in the smallest details.
Like his narrator, Melville was a restless and curious spirit, who gained an unorthodox education working as a sailor on a series of grueling voyages around the world in his youth.
He published "Moby Dick" in 1851, when the United States’ whaling industry was at its height.
Nantucket, where the Pequod sets sail, was the epicenter of this lucrative and bloody global industry which decimated the world’s whale populations.
Unusually for his time, Melville doesn’t shy away from the ugly side of this industry, even taking the whale’s perspective at one point, when he speculates on how terrifying the huge shadows of the ships must be to the creature swimming below.
The author’s first-hand familiarity with whaling is evident over and over again in Ishmael’s vivid descriptions.
In one chapter, the skin of a whale’s penis becomes protective clothing for a crewman.
Chapters with titles as unpromising as “Cistern and Buckets” become some of the novel’s most rewarding as Ishmael compares bailing out a sperm-whale’s head to midwifery, which leads to reflections on Plato.
Tangling whale-lines provoke witty reflections on the “ever-present perils” entangling all mortals.
He draws on diverse branches of knowledge, like zoology, gastronomy, law, economics, mythology, and teachings from a range of religious and cultural traditions.
The book experiments with writing style as much as subject matter.
In one monologue, Ahab challenges Moby Dick in Shakespearean style: “Towards thee I roll, thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with thee; from hell’s heart I stab at thee; for hate’s sake I spit my last breath at thee.” One chapter is written as a playscript, where members of the Pequod’s multi-ethnic crew chime in individually and in chorus.
African and Spanish sailors trade insults while a Tahitian seaman longs for home, Chinese and Portuguese crewmembers call for a dance, and one young boy prophesies disaster.
In another chapter, Ishmael sings the process of decanting whale oil in epic style, as the ship pitches and rolls in the midnight sea and the casks rumble like landslides.
A book so wide-ranging has something for everyone.
Readers have found religious and political allegory, existential enquiry, social satire, economic analysis, and representations of American imperialism, industrial relations and racial conflict.
As Ishmael chases meaning and Ahab chases the white whale, the book explores the opposing forces of optimism and uncertainty, curiosity and fear that characterize human existence no matter what it is we’re chasing.
Through "Moby Dick’s" many pages, Melville invites his readers to leap into the unknown, to join him on the hunt for the “ungraspable phantom of life.”
The public debate about architecture quite often just stays on contemplating the final result, the architectural object.
Is the latest tower in London a gherkin or a sausage or a sex tool?
So recently, we asked ourselves if we could invent a format that could actually tell the stories behind the projects, maybe combining images and drawings and words to actually sort of tell stories about architecture.
And we discovered that we didn't have to invent it, it already existed in the form of a comic book.
So we basically copied the format of the comic book to actually tell the stories of behind the scenes, how our projects actually evolve through adaptation and improvisation.
Sort of through the turmoil and the opportunities and the incidents of the real world.
We call this comic book "Yes is More," which is obviously a sort of evolution of the ideas of some of our heroes.
In this case it's Mies van der Rohe's Less is More.
He triggered the modernist revolution.
After him followed the post-modern counter-revolution, Robert Venturi saying, "Less is a bore."
After him, Philip Johnson sort of introduced (Laughter) you could say promiscuity, or at least openness to new ideas with, "I am a whore."
Recently, Obama has introduced optimism at a sort of time of global financial crisis.
And what we'd like to say with "Yes is More" is basically trying to question this idea that the architectural avant-garde is almost always negatively defined, as who or what we are against.
The cliche of the radical architect is the sort of angry young man rebelling against the establishment.
Or this idea of the misunderstood genius, frustrated that the world doesn't fit in with his or her ideas.
Rather than revolution, we're much more interested in evolution, this idea that things gradually evolve by adapting and improvising to the changes of the world.
In fact, I actually think that Darwin is one of the people who best explains our design process.
His famous evolutionary tree could almost be a diagram of the way we work.
As you can see, a project evolves through a series of generations of design meetings.
At each meeting, there's way too many ideas.
Only the best ones can survive.
And through a process of architectural selection, we might choose a really beautiful model or we might have a very functional model.
We mate them. They have sort of mutant offspring.
And through these sort of generations of design meetings we arrive at a design.
A very literal way of showing it is a project we did for a library and a hotel in Copenhagen.
The design process was really tough, almost like a struggle for survival, but gradually an idea evolved: this sort of idea of a rational tower that melts together with the surrounding city, sort of expanding the public space onto what we refer to as a Scandinavian version of the Spanish Steps in Rome, but sort of public on the outside, as well as on the inside, with the library.
But Darwin doesn't only explain the evolution of a single idea.
As you can see, sometimes a subspecies branches off.
And quite often we sit in a design meeting and we discover that there is this great idea.
It doesn't really work in this context.
But for another client in another culture, it could really be the right answer to a different question.
So as a result, we never throw anything out.
We keep our office almost like an archive of architectural biodiversity.
You never know when you might need it.
And what I'd like to do now, in an act of warp-speed storytelling, is tell the story of how two projects evolved by adapting and improvising to the happenstance of the world.
The first story starts last year when we went to Shanghai to do the competition for the Danish National Pavilion for the World Expo in 2010.
And we saw this guy, Haibao.
He's the mascot of the expo, and he looks strangely familiar.
In fact he looked like a building we had designed for a hotel in the north of Sweden.
When we submitted it for the Swedish competition we thought it was a really cool scheme, but it didn't exactly look like something from the north of Sweden.
The Swedish jury didn't think so either. So we lost.
But then we had a meeting with a Chinese businessman who saw our design and said, "Wow, that's the Chinese character for the word 'people.'" (Laughter) So, apparently this is how you write "people," as in the People's Republic of China.
We even double checked.
And at the same time, we got invited to exhibit at the Shanghai Creative Industry Week.
So we thought like, this is too much of an opportunity, so we hired a feng shui master.
We scaled the building up three times to Chinese proportions, and went to China.
(Laughter) So the People's Building, as we called it.
This is our two interpreters, sort of reading the architecture.
It went on the cover of the Wen Wei Po newspaper, which got Mr. Liangyu Chen, the mayor of Shanghai, to visit the exhibition.
And we had the chance to explain the project.
And he said, "Shanghai is the city in the world with most skyscrapers," but to him it was as if the connection to the roots had been cut over.
And with the People's Building, he saw an architecture that could bridge the gap between the ancient wisdom of China and the progressive future of China.
So we obviously profoundly agreed with him.
(Laughter) (Applause) Unfortunately, Mr. Chen is now in prison for corruption.
(Laughter) But like I said, Haibao looked very familiar, because he is actually the Chinese character for "people."
And they chose this mascot because the theme of the expo is "Better City, Better Life."
Sustainability.
And we thought, sustainability has grown into being this sort of neo-Protestant idea that it has to hurt in order to do good.
You know, you're not supposed to take long, warm showers.
You're not supposed to fly on holidays because it's bad for the environment.
Gradually, you get this idea that sustainable life is less fun than normal life.
So we thought that maybe it could be interesting to focus on examples where a sustainable city actually increases the quality of life.
We also asked ourselves, what could Denmark possibly show China that would be relevant?
You know, it's one of the biggest countries in the world, one of the smallest.
China symbolized by the dragon.
Denmark, we have a national bird, the swan.
(Laughter) China has many great poets, but we discovered that in the People's Republic public school curriculum, they have three fairy tales by An Tu Sheng, or Hans Christian Anderson, as we call him.
So that means that all 1.3 billion Chinese have grown up with "The Emperor's New Clothes," "The Matchstick Girl" and "The Little Mermaid."
It's almost like a fragment of Danish culture integrated into Chinese culture.
The biggest tourist attraction in China is the Great Wall.
The Great Wall is the only thing that can be seen from the moon.
The big tourist attraction in Denmark is The Little Mermaid.
That can actually hardly be seen from the canal tours.
(Laughter) And it sort of shows the difference between these two cities.
Copenhagen, Shanghai, modern, European.
But then we looked at recent urban development, and we noticed that this is like a Shanghai street, 30 years ago. All bikes, no cars.
This is how it looks today; all traffic jam.
Bicycles have become forbidden many places.
Meanwhile, in Copenhagen we're actually expanding the bicycle lanes.
A third of all the people commute by bike.
We have a free system of bicycles called the City Bike that you can borrow if you visit the city.
So we thought, why don't we reintroduce the bicycle in China?
We donate 1,000 bikes to Shanghai.
So if you come to the expo, go straight to the Danish pavilion, get a Danish bike, and then continue on that to visit the other pavilions.
Like I said, Shanghai and Copenhagen are both port cities, but in Copenhagen the water has gotten so clean that you can actually swim in it.
One of the first projects we ever did was the harbor bath in Copenhagen, sort of continuing the public realm into the water.
So we thought that these expos quite often have a lot of state financed propaganda, images, statements, but no real experience.
So just like with a bike, we don't talk about it.
You can try it.
Like with the water, instead of talking about it, we're going to sail a million liters of harbor water from Copenhagen to Shanghai, so the Chinese who have the courage can actually dive in and feel how clean it is.
This is where people normally object that it doesn't sound very sustainable to sail water from Copenhagen to China.
But in fact, the container ships go full of goods from China to Denmark, and then they sail empty back.
So quite often you load water for ballast.
So we can actually hitch a ride for free.
And in the middle of this sort of harbor bath, we're actually going to put the actual Little Mermaid.
So the real Mermaid, the real water, and the real bikes.
And when she's gone, we're going to invite a Chinese artist to reinterpret her.
The architecture of the pavilion is this sort of loop of exhibition and bikes.
When you go to the exhibition, you'll see the Mermaid and the pool.
You'll walk around, start looking for a bicycle on the roof, jump on your ride and then continue out into the rest of the expo.
So when we actually won the competition we had to do an exhibition in China explaining the project.
And to our surprise we got one of our boards back with corrections from the Chinese state censorship.
The first thing, the China map missed Taiwan.
It's a very serious political issue in China. We will add on.
The second thing, we had compared the swan to the dragon, and then the Chinese state said, "Suggest change to panda."
(Laughter) (Applause) So, when it came out in Denmark that we were actually going to move our national monument, the National People's Party sort of rebelled against it.
They tried to pass a law against moving the Mermaid.
So for the first time, I got invited to speak at the National Parliament.
It was kind of interesting because in the morning, from 9 to 11, they were discussing the bailout package -- how many billions to invest in saving the Danish economy.
And then at 11 o'clock they stopped talking about these little issues.
And then from 11 to 1, they were debating whether or not to send the Mermaid to China.
(Laughter) (Applause) But to conclude, if you want to see the Mermaid from May to December next year, don't come to Copenhagen, because she's going to be in Shanghai.
If you do come to Copenhagen, you will probably see an installation by Ai Weiwei, the Chinese artist.
But if the Chinese government intervenes, it might even be a panda.
(Laughter) So the second story that I'd like to tell is, actually starts in my own house.
This is my apartment.
This is the view from my apartment, over the sort of landscape of triangular balconies that our client called the Leonardo DiCaprio balcony.
And they form this sort of vertical backyard where, on a nice summer day, you'll actually get introduced to all your neighbors in a vertical radius of 10 meters.
The house is sort of a distortion of a square block.
Trying to zigzag it to make sure that all of the apartments look at the straight views, instead of into each other.
Until recently, this was the view from my apartment, onto this place where our client actually bought the neighbor site.
And he said that he was going to do an apartment block next to a parking structure.
And we thought, rather than doing a traditional stack of apartments looking straight into a big boring block of cars, why don't we turn all the apartments into penthouses, put them on a podium of cars.
And because Copenhagen is completely flat, if you want to have a nice south-facing slope with a view, you basically have to do it yourself.
Then we sort of cut up the volume, so we wouldn't block the view from my apartment.
(Laughter) And essentially the parking is sort of occupying the deep space underneath the apartments.
And up in the sun, you have a single layer of apartments that combine all the splendors of a suburban lifestyle, like a house with a garden with a sort of metropolitan view, and a sort of dense urban location.
This is our first architectural model.
This is an aerial photo taken last summer.
And essentially, the apartments cover the parking.
They are accessed through this diagonal elevator.
It's actually a stand-up product from Switzerland, because in Switzerland they have a natural need for diagonal elevators.
(Laughter) And the facade of the parking, we wanted to make the parking naturally ventilated, so we needed to perforate it.
And we discovered that by controlling the size of the holes, we could actually turn the entire facade into a gigantic, naturally ventilated, rasterized image.
And since we always refer to the project as The Mountain, we commissioned this Japanese Himalaya photographer to give us this beautiful photo of Mount Everest, making the entire building a 3,000 square meter artwork.
(Applause) So if you go back into the parking, into the corridors, it's almost like traveling into a parallel universe from cars and colors, into this sort of south-facing urban oasis.
The wood of your apartment continues outside becoming the facades.
If you go even further, it turns into this green garden.
And all the rainwater that drops on the Mountain is actually accumulated.
And there is an automatic irrigation system that makes sure that this sort of landscape of gardens, in one or two years it will sort of transform into a Cambodian temple ruin, completely covered in green.
So, the Mountain is like our first built example of what we like to refer to as architectural alchemy.
This idea that you can actually create, if not gold, then at least added value by mixing traditional ingredients, like normal apartments and normal parking, and in this case actually offer people the chance that they don't have to choose between a life with a garden or a life in the city.
They can actually have both.
As an architect, it's really hard to set the agenda.
You can't just say that now I'd like to do a sustainable city in central Asia, because that's not really how you get commissions.
You always have to sort of adapt and improvise to the opportunities and accidents that happen, and the sort of turmoil of the world.
One last example is that recently we, like last summer, we won the competition to design a Nordic national bank.
This was the director of the bank when he was still smiling.
(Laughter) It was in the middle of the capital so we were really excited by this opportunity.
Unfortunately, it was the national bank of Iceland.
At the same time, we actually had a visitor -- a minister from Azerbaijan came to our office.
We took him to see the Mountain. And he got very excited by this idea that you could actually make mountains out of architecture, because Azerbaijan is known as the Alps of Central Asia.
So he asked us if we could actually imagine an urban master plan on an island outside the capital that would recreate the silhouette of the seven most significant mountains of Azerbaijan.
So we took the commission.
And we made this small movie that I'd like to show.
We quite often make little movies.
We always argue a lot about the soundtrack, but in this case it was really easy to choose the song.
So basically, Baku is this sort of crescent bay overlooking the island of Zira, the island that we are planning -- almost like the diagram of their flag.
And our main idea was to sort of sample the seven most significant mountains of the topography of Azerbaijan and reinterpret them into urban and architectural structures, inhabitable of human life.
Then we place these mountains on the island, surrounding this sort of central green valley, almost like a central park.
And what makes it interesting is that the island right now is just a piece of desert. It has no vegetation.
It has no water. It has no energy, no resources.
So we actually sort of designed the entire island as a single ecosystem, exploiting wind energy to drive the desalination plants, and to use the thermal properties of water to heat and cool the buildings.
And all the sort of excess freshwater wastewater is filtered organically into the landscape, gradually transforming the desert island into sort of a green, lush landscape.
So, you can say where an urban development normally happens at the expense of nature, in this case it's actually creating nature.
And the buildings, they don't only sort of invoke the imagery of the mountains, they also operate like mountains.
They create shelter from the wind.
They accumulate the solar energy.
They accumulate the water.
So they actually transform the entire island into a single ecosystem.
So we recently presented the master plan, and it has gotten approved.
And this summer we are starting the construction documents of the two first mountains, in what's going to be the first carbon-neutral island in Central Asia.
(Applause) Yes, maybe just to round off.
So in a way you can see how the Mountain in Copenhagen sort of evolved into the Seven Peaks of Azerbaijan.
With a little luck and some more evolution, maybe in 10 years it could be the Five Mountains on Mars.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A new virus emerges and spreads like wildfire.
In order to contain it, researchers must first collect data about who’s been infected.
Two main viral testing techniques are critical: one tells you if you have the virus and the other shows if you’ve already had it.
So, how exactly do these tests work?
PCR, or polymerase chain reaction testing, targets the virus’s genetic material in the body and is used to diagnose someone who is currently infected.
Yet, this genetic material may be present in such imperceptible amounts that actually detecting it is difficult.
This is where PCR comes in: it’s widely used to amplify genetic information to large enough quantities that it can be readily observed.
To develop a PCR test for a never-before-seen virus, researchers first sequence its genetic material, or genome, and identify regions that are unique to that specific virus.
PCR then targets these particular segments.
A PCR test begins by collecting a sample: this can be blood for hepatitis viruses, feces for poliovirus, and samples from the nose or throat for coronaviruses.
The sample is taken to a central laboratory where PCR is performed to test for the presence of the virus’ genome.
Genetic information can be encoded via DNA or RNA.
HPV, for example, uses DNA, while SARS-CoV-2, the cause of COVID-19, uses RNA.
Before running the PCR, the viral RNA— if present— must be reverse transcribed to make a strand of complementary DNA.
Researchers then run the PCR.
If the virus is present in the sample, its unique regions of genetic code will be identified by complementary primers and copied by enzymes.
One strand of DNA becomes hundreds of millions, which are detected using probes marked with fluorescent dye.
If the PCR machine senses fluorescence, the sample has tested positive for the virus, meaning the individual is infected.
Immunoassays, on the other hand, tap into the immune system’s memory of the virus, showing if someone has previously been infected.
They work by targeting virus-specific antibodies generated by the immune system during infection.
These are specialized classes of proteins that identify and fight foreign substances, like viruses.
Immunoassays may detect IgG antibodies, the most abundant class, and IgM antibodies, the type that’s first produced in response to a new infection.
The presence of IgM antibodies suggests a recent infection, but since it can take the body over a week to produce a detectable amount, they’re unreliable in diagnosing current infections.
Meanwhile, IgG antibodies circulate for an extended period after infection; their presence usually indicates that someone was exposed and recovered.
Before the immunoassay, health professionals draw blood from an individual.
This sample then comes into contact with a portion of the virus of interest.
If the body has, in fact, been exposed to the virus in the past, the body’s virus-specific antibodies will bind to it during the test.
This reaction produces a change in color, indicating that the sample tested positive and that the individual has been exposed to the virus.
Immunoassays are especially important when it comes to retroactively diagnosing people who were infected but went untested.
And there’s exciting potential for those who have developed immunity to a virus: in some cases, their blood plasma could be used as treatment in people who are currently fighting it.
PCR and immunoassays are always in the process of becoming more accurate and efficient.
For example, innovations in PCR have led to the use of self-contained testing devices that relay results within one hour.
Digital PCR, which quantifies individual pieces of target DNA, shows promise in further boosting accuracy.
And although immunoassays are difficult to develop quickly, researchers in Singapore were able to create one for SARS-CoV-2 even before COVID-19 was declared a pandemic.
These tests— along with the scientists who develop them and the health professionals who administer them— are absolutely essential.
And when deployed early, they can save millions of lives.
So the question is, what is invisible?
There is more of it than you think, actually.
Everything, I would say. Everything that matters except every thing and except matter.
We can see matter. But we can't see what's the matter.
As in this cryptic sentence I found in The Guardian recently: "The marriage suffered a setback in 1965, when the husband was killed by the wife."
(Laughter) There's a world of invisibility there, isn't there?
(Laughter) So, we can see the stars and the planets, but we can't see what holds them apart or what draws them together.
With matter, as with people, we see only the skin of things.
We can't see into the engine room.
We can't see what makes people tick, at least not without difficulty.
And the closer we look at anything, the more it disappears.
In fact, if you look really closely at stuff, if you look at the basic substructure of matter, there isn't anything there.
Electrons disappear in a kind of fuzz, and there is only energy. And you can't see energy.
So everything that matters, that's important, is invisible.
One slightly silly thing that's invisible is this story, which is invisible to you.
And I'm now going to make it visible to you in your minds.
It's about an M.P. called Geoffrey Dickens.
The late Geoffrey Dickens, M.P. was attending a fete in his constituency.
Wherever he went, at every stall he stopped he was closely followed by a devoted smiling woman of indescribable ugliness.
(Laughter) Try as he might, he couldn't get away from her.
A few days later he received a letter from a constituent saying how much she admired him, had met him at a fete and asking for a signed photograph.
After her name, written in brackets was the apt description, horse face.
(Laughter) "I've misjudged this women," thought Mr. Dickens.
"Not only is she aware of her physical repulsiveness, she turns it to her advantage.
A photo is not enough."
So he went out and bought a plastic frame to put the photograph in.
And on the photograph, he wrote with a flourish, "To Horse Face, with love from Geoffrey Dickens, M.P."
After it had been sent off, his secretary said to him, "Did you get that letter from the woman at the fete?
I wrote Horse Face on her, so you'd remember who she was."
(Laughter) I bet he thought he wished he was invisible, don't you?
(Laughter) So, one of the interesting things about invisibility is that things that we can't see we also can't understand.
Gravity is one thing that we can't see and which we don't understand.
It's the least understood of all the four fundamental forces, and the weakest.
And nobody really knows what it is or why it's there.
For what it's worth, Sir Isaac Newton, the greatest scientist who ever lived, he thought Jesus came to Earth specifically to operate the levers of gravity.
That's what he thought he was there for.
So, bright guy, could be wrong on that one, I don't know.
(Laughter) Consciousness. I see all your faces.
I have no idea what any of you are thinking. Isn't that amazing?
Isn't that incredible that we can't read each other's minds?
But we can touch each other, taste each other perhaps, if we get close enough.
But we can't read each other's minds. I find that quite astonishing.
In the Sufi faith, this great Middle Eastern religion, which some claim is the route of all religions, Sufi masters are all telepaths, so they say.
But their main exercise of telepathy is to send out powerful signals to the rest of us that it doesn't exist.
So that's why we don't think it exists, the Sufi masters working on us.
In the question of consciousness and artificial intelligence, artificial intelligence has really, like the study of consciousness, gotten nowhere. We have no idea how consciousness works.
With artificial intelligence, not only have they not created artificial intelligence, they haven't yet created artificial stupidity.
(Laughter) The laws of physics: invisible, eternal, omnipresent, all-powerful.
Remind you of anyone?
Interesting. I'm, as you can guess, not a materialist, I'm an immaterialist.
And I've found a very useful new word, ignostic. Okay?
I'm an ignostic.
I refuse to be drawn on the question of whether God exists, until somebody properly defines the terms.
(Laughter) Another thing we can't see is the human genome.
And this is increasingly peculiar, because about 20 years ago, when they started delving into the genome, they thought it would probably contain around 100,000 genes.
Geneticists will know this, but every year since, it's been revised downwards.
We now think there are likely to be only just over 20,000 genes in the human genome.
This is extraordinary. Because rice -- get this -- rice is known to have 38 thousand genes.
Potatoes, potatoes have 48 chromosomes. Do you know that?
Two more than people, and the same as a gorilla.
(Laughter) You can't see these things, but they are very strange.
(Laughter) The stars by day. I always think that's fascinating.
The universe disappears.
The more light there is, the less you can see.
Time, nobody can see time.
I don't know if you know this. Modern physics, there is a big movement in modern physics to decide that time doesn't really exist, because it's too inconvenient for the figures.
It's much easier if it's not really there.
You can't see the future, obviously.
And you can't see the past, except in your memory.
One of the interesting things about the past is you particularly can't see. My son asked me this the other day, he said, "Dad, can you remember what I was like when I was two?"
And I said, "Yes." And he said, "Why can't I?"
Isn't that extraordinary? You cannot remember what happened to you earlier than the age of two or three, which is great news for psychoanalysts, because otherwise they'd be out of a job.
Because that's where all the stuff happens (Laughter) that makes you who you are.
Another thing you can't see is the grid on which we hang.
This is fascinating. You probably know, some of you, that cells are continually renewed. You can see it in skin and this kind of stuff.
Skin flakes off, hairs grow, nails, that kind of stuff.
But every cell in your body is replaced at some point.
Taste buds, every 10 days or so.
Livers and internal organs sort of take a bit longer. A spine takes several years.
But at the end of seven years, not one cell in your body remains from what was there seven years ago.
The question is, who, then, are we?
What are we? What is this thing that we hang on, that is actually us?
Okay. Atoms, you can't see them.
Nobody ever will. They're smaller than the wavelength of light.
Gas, you can't see that.
Interesting. Somebody mentioned 1600 recently.
Gas was invented in 1600 by a Dutch chemist called Van Helmont.
It's said to be the most successful ever invention of a word by a known individual.
Quite good. He also invented a word called "blas," meaning astral radiation.
Didn't catch on, unfortunately.
(Laughter) But well done, him.
(Laughter) There is so many things that -- Light.
You can't see light. When it's dark, in a vacuum, if a person shines a beam of light straight across your eyes, you won't see it. Slightly technical, some physicists will disagree with this.
But it's odd that you can't see the beam of light, you can only see what it hits.
I find that extraordinary, not to be able to see light, not to be able to see darkness.
Electricity, you can't see that.
Don't let anyone tell you they understand electricity.
They don't. Nobody knows what it is.
(Laughter) You probably think the electrons in an electric wire move instantaneously down a wire, don't you, at the speed of light when you turn the light on. They don't.
Electrons bumble down the wire, about the speed of spreading honey, they say.
(Laughter) Galaxies, 100 billion of them estimated in the universe.
100 billion. How many can we see? Five.
Five out of the 100 billion galaxies, with the naked eye, and one of them is quite difficult to see unless you've got very good eyesight.
Radio waves. There's another thing.
Heinrich Hertz, when he discovered radio waves in 1887, he called them radio waves because they radiated.
And somebody said to him, "Well what's the point of these, Heinrich?
What's the point of these radio waves that you've found?"
And he said, "Well, I've no idea.
But I guess somebody will find a use for them someday."
And that's what they do, radio. That's what they discovered.
Anyway, so the biggest thing that's invisible to us is what we don't know.
It is incredible how little we know.
Thomas Edison once said, "We don't know one percent of one millionth about anything."
And I've come to the conclusion -- because you've asked this other question, "What's another thing you can't see?"
The point, most of us. What's the point?
(Laughter) (Applause) You can't see a point. It's by definition dimensionless, like an electron, oddly enough.
But the point, what I've got it down to, is there are only two questions really worth asking.
"Why are we here?" and "What should we do about it while we are?
And to help you, I've got two things to leave you with, from two great philosophers, perhaps two of the greatest philosopher thinkers of the 20th century, one a mathematician and an engineer, and the other a poet.
The first is Ludwig Wittgenstein who said, "I don't know why we are here.
But I'm pretty sure it's not in order to enjoy ourselves."
(Laughter) He was a cheerful bastard wasn't he?
(Laughter) And secondly and lastly, W.H. Auden, one of my favorite poets, who said, "We are here on earth to help others.
What the others are here for, I've no idea."
(Laughter) (Applause)
In the 16th century, Flemish physician Andreas Vesalius described how a suffocating animal could be kept alive by inserting a tube into its trachea and blowing air to inflate its lungs.
In 1555, this procedure didn’t warrant much acclaim.
But today, Vesalius’s treatise is recognized as the first description of mechanical ventilation— a crucial practice in modern medicine.
To appreciate the value of ventilation, we need to understand how the respiratory system works.
We breathe by contracting our diaphragms, which expands our chest cavities.
This allows air to be drawn in, inflating the alveoli— millions of small sacs inside our lungs.
Each of these tiny balloons is surrounded by a mesh of blood-filled capillaries.
This blood absorbs oxygen from the inflated alveoli and leaves behind carbon dioxide.
When the diaphragm is relaxed, the CO2 is exhaled alongside a mix of oxygen and other gases.
When our respiratory systems are working correctly, this process happens automatically.
But the respiratory system can be interrupted by a variety of conditions.
Sleep apnea stops diaphragm muscles from contracting.
Asthma can lead to inflamed airways which obstruct oxygen.
And pneumonia, often triggered by bacterial or viral infections, attacks the alveoli themselves.
Invading pathogens kill lung cells, triggering an immune response that can cause lethal inflammation and fluid buildup.
All these situations render the lungs unable to function normally.
But mechanical ventilators take over the process, getting oxygen into the body when the respiratory system cannot.
These machines can bypass constricted airways, and deliver highly oxygenated air to help damaged lungs diffuse more oxygen.
There are two main ways ventilators can work— pumping air into the patient’s lungs through positive pressure ventilation, or allowing air to be passively drawn in through negative pressure ventilation.
In the late 19th century, ventilation techniques largely focused on negative pressure, which closely approximates natural breathing and provides an even distribution of air in the lungs.
To achieve this, doctors created a tight seal around the patient’s body, either by enclosing them in a wooden box or a specially sealed room.
Air was then pumped out of the chamber, decreasing air pressure, and allowing the patient’s chest cavity to expand more easily.
In 1928, doctors developed a portable, metal device with pumps powered by an electric motor.
This machine, known as the iron lung, became a fixture in hospitals through the mid-20th century.
However, even the most compact negative pressure designs heavily restricted a patient’s movement and obstructed access for caregivers.
This led hospitals in the 1960’s to shift towards positive pressure ventilation.
For milder cases, this can be done non-invasively.
Often, a facemask is fitted over the mouth and nose, and filled with pressurized air which moves into the patient’s airway.
But more severe circumstances require a device that takes over the entire breathing process.
A tube is inserted into the patient’s trachea to pump air directly into the lungs, with a series of valves and branching pipes forming a circuit for inhalation and exhalation.
In most modern ventilators, an embedded computer system allows for monitoring the patient’s breathing and adjusting the airflow.
These machines aren’t used as a standard treatment, but rather, as a last resort.
Enduring this influx of pressurized air requires heavy sedation, and repeated ventilation can cause long-term lung damage.
But in extreme situations, ventilators can be the difference between life and death.
And events like the COVID-19 pandemic have shown that they’re even more essential than we thought.
Because current models are bulky, expensive, and require extensive training to operate, most hospitals only have a few in supply.
This may be enough under normal circumstances, but during emergencies, this limited cache is stretched thin.
The world urgently needs more low-cost and portable ventilators, as well as a faster means of producing and distributing this life-saving technology.
Consider this unfortunately familiar scenario.
Several months ago a highly infectious, sometimes deadly respiratory virus infected humans for the first time.
It then proliferated faster than public health measures could contain it.
Now the World Health Organization (WHO) has declared a pandemic, meaning that it’s spreading worldwide.
The death toll is starting to rise and everyone is asking the same question: when will the pandemic end?
The WHO will likely declare the pandemic over once the infection is mostly contained and rates of transmission drop significantly throughout the world.
But exactly when that happens depends on what global governments choose to do next.
They have three main options: Race through it, Delay and Vaccinate, or Coordinate and Crush.
One is widely considered best, and it may not be the one you think.
In the first, governments and communities do nothing to halt the spread and instead allow people to be exposed as quickly as possible.
Without time to study the virus, doctors know little about how to save their patients, and hospitals reach peak capacity almost immediately.
Somewhere in the range of millions to hundreds of millions of people die, either from the virus or the collapse of health care systems.
Soon the majority of people have been infected and either perished or survived by building up their immune responses.
Around this point herd immunity kicks in, where the virus can no longer find new hosts.
So the pandemic fizzles out a short time after it began.
But there’s another way to create herd immunity without such a high cost of life.
Let’s reset the clock to the moment the WHO declared the pandemic.
This time, governments and communities around the world slow the spread of the virus to give research facilities time to produce a vaccine.
They buy this crucial time through tactics that may include widespread testing to identify carriers, quarantining the infected and people they’ve interacted with, and physical distancing.
Even with these measures in place, the virus slowly spreads, causing up to hundreds of thousands of deaths.
Some cities get the outbreak under control and go back to business as usual, only to have a resurgence and return to physical distancing when a new case passes through.
Within the next several years, one or possibly several vaccines become widely, and hopefully freely, available thanks to a worldwide effort.
Once 40-90% of the population has received it— the precise amount varying based on the virus— herd immunity kicks in, and the pandemic fizzles out.
Let’s rewind the clock one more time, to consider the final strategy: Coordinate and Crush.
The idea here is to simultaneously starve the virus, everywhere, through a combination of quarantine, social distancing, and restricting travel.
The critical factor is to synchronize responses.
In a typical pandemic, when one country is peaking, another may be getting its first cases.
Instead of every leader responding to what’s happening in their jurisdiction, here everyone must treat the world as the giant interconnected system it is.
If coordinated properly, this could end a pandemic in just a few months, with low loss of life.
But unless the virus is completely eradicated— which is highly unlikely— there will be risks of it escalating to pandemic levels once again.
And factors like animals carrying and transmitting the virus might undermine our best efforts altogether.
So which strategy is best for this deadly, infectious respiratory virus?
Racing through it is a quick fix, but would be a global catastrophe, and may not work at all if people can be reinfected.
Crushing the virus through Coordination alone is also enticing for its speed, but only reliable with true and nearly impossible global cooperation.
That’s why vaccination, assisted by as much global coordination as possible, is generally considered to be the winner; it’s the slow, steady, and proven option in the race.
Even if the pandemic officially ends before a vaccine is ready, the virus may reappear seasonally, so vaccines will continue to protect people.
And although it may take years to create, disruptions to most people’s lives won’t necessarily last the full duration.
Breakthroughs in treatment and prevention of symptoms can make viruses much less dangerous, and therefore require less extreme containment measures.
Take heart: the pandemic will end.
Its legacy will be long-lasting, but not all bad; the breakthroughs, social services, and systems we develop can be used to the betterment of everyone.
And if we take inspiration from the successes and lessons from the failures, we can keep the next potential pandemic so contained that our children’s children won’t even know its name.
We see with the eyes, but we see with the brain as well.
And seeing with the brain is often called imagination.
And we are familiar with the landscapes of our own imagination, our inscapes.
But there are also hallucinations as well.
And hallucinations are completely different.
They don't seem to be of our creation.
They don't seem to be under control.
They seem to come from the outside and to mimic perception.
So I am going to be talking about hallucinations and a particular sort of visual hallucination, which I see among my patients.
A few months ago, I got a phone call from a nursing home where I work.
They told me that one of their residents, an old lady in her 90s, was seeing things, and they wondered if she'd gone bonkers or, because she was an old lady, whether she'd had a stroke, or whether she had Alzheimer's.
And so they asked me if I would come and see Rosalie, the old lady.
I went in to see her.
It was evident straightaway that she was perfectly sane and lucid and of good intelligence, but she'd been very startled and very bewildered, because she'd been seeing things.
And she told me -- the nurses hadn't mentioned this -- that she was blind, that she had been completely blind from macular degeneration for five years.
But now, for the last few days, she'd been seeing things.
So I said, "What sort of things?"
And she said, "People in Eastern dress, in drapes, walking up and down stairs.
A man who turns towards me and smiles, but he has huge teeth on one side of his mouth.
Animals too.
I see a white building. It's snowing, a soft snow.
I see this horse with a harness, dragging the snow away.
Then, one night, the scene changes.
I see cats and dogs walking towards me.
They come to a certain point and then stop.
Then it changes again.
I see a lot of children. They're walking up and down stairs.
They wear bright colors, rose and blue, like Eastern dress."
Sometimes, she said, before the people come on, she may hallucinate pink and blue squares on the floor, which seem to go up to the ceiling.
I said, "Is this like a dream?"
And she said, "No, it's not like a dream. It's like a movie."
She said, "It's got color. It's got motion.
But it's completely silent, like a silent movie."
And she said it's a rather boring movie.
(Laughter) She said, "All these people with Eastern dress, walking up and down, very repetitive, very limited."
(Laughter) And she had a sense of humor.
She knew it was a hallucination, but she was frightened.
She had lived 95 years, and she'd never had a hallucination before.
She said that the hallucinations were unrelated to anything she was thinking or feeling or doing, that they seemed to come on by themselves, or disappear.
She had no control over them.
She said she didn't recognize any of the people or places in the hallucinations, and none of the people or the animals -- well, they all seemed oblivious of her.
And she didn't know what was going on.
She wondered if she was going mad or losing her mind.
Well, I examined her carefully.
She was a bright old lady, perfectly sane.
She wasn't on any medications which could produce hallucinations.
But she was blind.
And I then said to her, "I think I know what you have."
I said, "There is a special form of visual hallucination which may go with deteriorating vision or blindness.
This was originally described," I said, "right back in the 18th century, by a man called Charles Bonnet.
And you have Charles Bonnet syndrome.
There's nothing wrong with your brain. There's nothing wrong with your mind.
And she was very relieved at this, that there was nothing seriously the matter, and also rather curious.
She said, "Who is this Charles Bonnet?"
She said, "Did he have them himself?"
And she said, "Tell all the nurses that I have Charles Bonnet syndrome."
(Laughter) "I'm not crazy. I'm not demented. I have Charles Bonnet syndrome."
Well, so, I did tell the nurses.
Now this, for me, is a common situation.
I work in old-age homes, largely.
I see a lot of elderly people who are hearing-impaired or visually impaired.
About 10 percent of the hearing-impaired people get musical hallucinations.
And about 10 percent of the visually impaired people get visual hallucinations.
You don't have to be completely blind, only sufficiently impaired.
Now, with the original description in the 18th century, Charles Bonnet did not have them.
His grandfather had these hallucinations.
His grandfather was a magistrate, an elderly man.
He'd had cataract surgery.
His vision was pretty poor.
And in 1759, he described to his grandson various things he was seeing.
The first thing he said was he saw a handkerchief in midair.
It was a large blue handkerchief with four orange circles.
And he knew it was a hallucination.
You don't have handkerchiefs in midair.
And then he saw a big wheel in midair.
But sometimes he wasn't sure whether he was hallucinating or not, because the hallucinations would fit in the context of the visions.
So on one occasion, when his granddaughters were visiting them, he said, "And who are these handsome young men with you?"
(Laughter) And they said, "Alas, Grandpapa, there are no handsome young men."
And then the handsome young men disappeared.
It's typical of these hallucinations that they may come in a flash and disappear in a flash.
They don't usually fade in and out.
They are rather sudden, and they change suddenly.
Charles Lullin, the grandfather, saw hundreds of different figures, different landscapes of all sorts.
On one occasion, he saw a man in a bathrobe smoking a pipe, and realized it was himself.
That was the only figure he recognized.
On one occasion, when he was walking in the streets of Paris, he saw -- this was real -- a scaffolding.
But when he got back home, he saw a miniature of the scaffolding, six inches high, on his study table.
This repetition of perception is sometimes called "palinopsia."
With him and with Rosalie, what seems to be going on -- and Rosalie said, "What's going on?" -- and I said that as you lose vision, as the visual parts of the brain are no longer getting any input, they become hyperactive and excitable, and they start to fire spontaneously.
And you start to see things.
The things you see can be very complicated indeed.
With another patient of mine who also had some vision, the visions she had could be disturbing.
On one occasion, she said she saw a man in a striped shirt in a restaurant.
And he turned round, and then he divided into six figures in striped shirts, who started walking towards her.
And then the six figures came together, like a concertina.
Once, when she was driving, or rather, her husband was driving, the road divided into four and she felt herself going simultaneously up four roads.
She had very mobile hallucinations as well.
A lot of them had to do with a car.
Sometimes she would see a teenage boy sitting on the hood of the car.
He was very tenacious, and he moved rather gracefully when the car turned.
And then when they came to a stop, the boy would do a sudden vertical takeoff, 100 foot in the air, and then disappear.
Another patient of mine had a different sort of hallucination.
This was a woman who didn't have trouble with her eyes but the visual parts of her brain, a little tumor in the occipital cortex.
And, above all, she would see cartoons.
And these cartoons would be transparent, and would cover half the visual field, like a screen.
And especially, she saw cartoons of Kermit the Frog.
(Laughter) Now, I don't watch Sesame Street, but she made a point of saying, "Why Kermit?" she said, "Kermit the Frog means nothing to me."
You know, I was wondering about Freudian determinants: Why Kermit?
"Kermit the Frog means nothing to me."
She didn't mind the cartoons too much.
But what did disturb her was she got very persistent images or hallucinations of faces, and as with Rosalie, the faces were often deformed, with very large teeth or very large eyes.
And these frightened her.
Well, what is going on with these people?
As a physician, I have to try and define what's going on and to reassure people, especially to reassure them that they're not going insane.
Something like 10 percent, as I said, of visually impaired people get these.
But no more than one percent of the people acknowledge them, because they are afraid they will be seen as insane or something.
And if they do mention them to their own doctors, they may be misdiagnosed.
In particular, the notion is that if you see things or hear things, you're going mad.
But the psychotic hallucinations are quite different.
Psychotic hallucinations, whether they are visual or vocal, they address you.
They accuse you, they seduce you, they humiliate you, they jeer at you.
You interact with them.
There is none of this quality of being addressed with these Charles Bonnet hallucinations.
There is a film. You're seeing a film which has nothing to do with you -- or that's how people think about it.
There is also a rare thing called temporal lobe epilepsy, and sometimes, if one has this, one may feel oneself transported back to a time and place in the past.
You're at a particular road junction.
You smell chestnuts roasting.
You hear the traffic. All the senses are involved.
And you're waiting for your girl.
And it's that Tuesday evening back in 1982.
The temporal lobe hallucinations are all sense hallucinations, full of feeling, full of familiarity, located in space and time, coherent, dramatic.
The Charles Bonnet ones are quite different.
In the Charles Bonnet hallucinations, you have all sorts of levels, from the geometrical hallucinations -- the pink and blue squares the woman had -- up to quite elaborate hallucinations with figures and especially faces.
Faces, and sometimes deformed faces, are the single commonest thing in these hallucinations.
And one of the second commonest is cartoons.
So, what is going on?
Fascinatingly, in the last few years, it's been possible to do functional brain imagery, to do fMRI on people as they are hallucinating, and, in fact, to find that different parts of the visual brain are activated as they are hallucinating.
When people have these simple, geometrical hallucinations, the primary visual cortex is activated.
This is the part of the brain which perceives edges and patterns.
You don't form images with your primary visual cortex.
When images are formed, a higher part of the visual cortex is involved, in the temporal lobe.
And in particular, one area of the temporal lobe is called the fusiform gyrus.
And it's known that if people have damage in the fusiform gyrus, they may lose the ability to recognize faces.
But if there's an abnormal activity in the fusiform gyrus, they may hallucinate faces, and this is exactly what you find in some of these people.
There is an area in the anterior part of this gyrus where teeth and eyes are represented, and that part of the gyrus is activated when people get the deformed hallucinations.
There is another part of the brain which is especially activated when one sees cartoons.
It's activated when one recognizes cartoons, when one draws cartoons and when one hallucinates them.
It's very interesting that that should be specific.
There are other parts of the brain which are specifically involved with the recognition and hallucination of buildings and landscapes.
Around 1970, it was found that there were not only parts of the brain, but particular cells.
"Face cells" were discovered around 1970.
And now we know that there are hundreds of other sorts of cells, which can be very, very specific.
So you may not only have "car" cells, you may have "Aston Martin" cells.
(Laughter) I saw an Aston Martin this morning. I had to bring it in.
(Laughter) And now it's in there, somewhere.
So -- (Laughter) now, at this level, in what's called the inferotemporal cortex, there are only visual images, or figments or fragments.
It's only at higher levels that the other senses join in and there are connections with memory and emotion.
And in the Charles Bonnet syndrome, you don't go to those higher levels.
You're in these levels of inferior visual cortex, where you have thousands and tens of thousands and millions of images, or figments or fragmentary figments, all neurally encoded in particular cells or small clusters of cells.
Normally, these are all part of the integrated stream of perception, or imagination, and one is not conscious of them.
It is only if one is visually impaired or blind that the process is interrupted.
And instead of getting normal perception, you're getting an anarchic, convulsive stimulation, or release, of all of these visual cells in the inferotemporal cortex.
So, suddenly, you see a face. Suddenly, you see a car.
Suddenly this and suddenly that.
The mind does its best to organize and to give some sort of coherence to this, but not terribly successfully.
When these were first described, it was thought that they could be interpreted like dreams.
But, in fact, people say, "I don't recognize the people. I can't form any associations.
Kermit means nothing to me."
You don't get anywhere, thinking of them as dreams.
Well, I've more or less said what I wanted.
I think I just want to recapitulate and say this is common.
Think of the number of blind people.
There must be hundreds of thousands of blind people who have these hallucinations but are too scared to mention them.
So this sort of thing needs to be brought into notice, for patients, for doctors, for the public.
Finally, I think they are infinitely interesting and valuable, for giving one some insight as to how the brain works.
Charles Bonnet said, 250 years ago -- he wondered how, thinking of these hallucinations, how, as he put it, the theater of the mind could be generated by the machinery of the brain.
Now, 250 years later, I think we're beginning to glimpse how this is done.
Thanks very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: That was superb. Thank you so much.
You speak about these things with so much insight and empathy for your patients.
Have you yourself experienced any of the syndromes you write about?
Oliver Sacks: I was afraid you would ask that.
(Laughter) Well, yeah, a lot of them.
And, actually, I'm a little visually impaired myself.
I'm blind in one eye and not terribly good in the other.
And I see the geometrical hallucinations.
But they stop there.
CA: And they don't disturb you?
Because you understand what's doing it, it doesn't make you worried?
OS: Well, they don't disturb me any more than my tinnitus, which I ignore.
They occasionally interest me, and I have many pictures of them in my notebooks.
I've gone and had an fMRI myself, to see how my visual cortex is ticking over.
And when I see all these hexagons and complex things, which I also have, in visual migraine, I wonder whether everyone sees things like this and whether things like cave art or ornamental art may have been derived from them a bit.
CA: That was an utterly, utterly fascinating talk.
Thank you so much for sharing.
OS: Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause)
A canvas drenched in sunset hues, colors radiating like flame.
At first glance, this painting may appear to be an impossible, abstract image.
But a closer look reveals the tender stems, lush petals and velvety texture of a Canna Lily.
This metamorphosis of natural subjects into abstract geometry is commonplace in the work of Georgia O’Keeffe— the revolutionary American painter and sculptor.
But the magic behind this transformation remains just as elusive as the artist herself.
Born in Wisconsin in 1887, O’Keeffe spent her childhood plucking wildflowers and arranging fruits to paint.
At seventeen, she moved to Chicago to study at the prestigious Art Institute.
Her teachers trained her to faithfully reproduce reality in the conventions of European masters.
Although she enjoyed the solitude and precision of this work, O’Keeffe felt little personal connection to it.
After moving to New York, she was increasingly drawn to the clean lines, striking composition and vivid colors of Japanese art.
O’Keeffe soon found a teacher whose lessons inspired her to put those interests into practice.
Unlike her previous teachers, Arthur Wesley Dow urged his students to focus on more abstract representations of light, shape, and color.
These lessons manifested in O’Keeffe’s first series of abstract drawings.
Rendered in charcoal, they present a series of undulating lines, bold shading and billowing clouds.
These drawings defy easy classification— suggesting, but never quite matching, any specific natural reference.
Earlier European painters in the Cubist tradition had employed rigid geometry to abstract external subjects.
But here, O’Keeffe employed the shapes and rhythms of nature to capture her internal feelings.
Experiments like these would soon become a cornerstone of an artistic movement called American Modernism.
Although no single style defines Modernist painting, its proponents shared a desire to challenge the realist traditions that dominated art education.
Beginning in the late 1910’s, Modernist painting often used geometric shapes and bold colors to probe the American psyche.
O’Keeffe threw herself into these experiments — but she was reluctant to share her new work.
However, when a friend sent her charcoals to the art dealer Alfred Stieglitz, he became entranced.
In 1916, he arranged for a grand exhibition in New York.
This marked the beginning of O’Keeffe’s career as a popular artist— and a relationship that would lead to marriage in 1924.
Marriage didn’t diminish O’Keeffe’s taste for solitude.
She travelled widely to teach, and often retreated to paint for months at a time.
Whether she was exploring the craggy canyons of Texas, the quiet forests of South Carolina, or the sun-bleached desert of New Mexico, her creative process was based on ritual and close observation.
She paid meticulous attention to small details, and spent hours mixing paints to create exactly the right colors.
When she found the perfect hue, she’d record it in her ever-growing collection of handmade color cards.
O’Keeffe also experimented with perspective to celebrate objects that were often overlooked.
In "Rams Head with Hollyhock," she places a weathered skull and a delicate flower high above the hills below.
This massive skull overshadows the landscape, casting both the skeleton and the mountains in a new, eerie light.
The public was captivated by her unique perspective and secretive behavior.
She was particularly praised for her massive flower paintings, ranging from fiery poppies to ghostly calla lillies.
Stieglitz and other critics of the time were infatuated by Freudian psychology, and were quick to link these paintings to female genitalia.
But O’Keeffe dismissed such interpretations.
She resented the male gaze that dominated the art world, and demanded her work be respected for its emotional evocation of the natural world.
Eventually, O’Keeffe settled down in New Mexico, near one of her favorite artist retreats.
In her 70’s, her eyesight began to fail, but she continued to mine the landscape’s mysteries in new, tactile mediums.
O’Keeffe kept creating until her death at 98, and is remembered as the “Mother of American Modernism.” Decades on, her work retains its wild energy— and O’Keeffe her personal mystique.
♫ Where do we go from here? ♫ ♫ How do we carry on? ♫ ♫ I can't get beyond the questions ♫ ♫ Clambering for the scraps ♫ ♫ in the shatter of us, collapsed ♫ ♫ It cuts me with every could have been ♫ ♫ Pain on pain on play, repeating ♫ ♫ With the backup, makeshift life in waiting ♫ ♫ Everybody says ♫ ♫ time heals everything ♫ ♫ What of the wretched hollow? ♫ ♫ The endless in between? ♫ ♫ Are we just going to wait it out? ♫ ♫ There is nothing to see here now ♫ ♫ Turning the sign around ♫ ♫ We're closed to the Earth 'til further notice ♫ ♫ A crumbling cliche case ♫ ♫ crumpled and puffy faced ♫ ♫ caught dead in the stare of a thousand miles ♫ ♫ All I want, only one street level miracle ♫ ♫ I'll be an out and out born again ♫ ♫ from none more cynical ♫ ♫ Everybody says ♫ ♫ that time heals everything ♫ ♫ But what of the wretched hollow? ♫ ♫ The endless in between? ♫ ♫ Are we just going to wait it out? ♫ ♫ And sit here cold? ♫ ♫ We will be long gone by then ♫ ♫ In lackluster ♫ ♫ In dust we lay around old magazines ♫ ♫ Fluorescent lighting sets the scene ♫ ♫ for all we could and should be being ♫ ♫ in the one life that we've got ♫ ♫ Everybody says ♫ ♫ time heals everything ♫ ♫ And what of the wretched hollow? ♫ ♫ The endless in between? ♫ ♫ Are we just going to wait it out? ♫ ♫ Just going to sweat it out? ♫ ♫ Just going to sweat it out? ♫ ♫ Wait it out ♫ (Applause)
I bet you're worried.
(Laughter) I was worried.
I was worried about vaginas.
I was worried what we think about vaginas and even more worried that we don't think about them.
I was worried about my own vagina.
It needed a context, a culture, a community of other vaginas.
There is so much darkness and secrecy surrounding them.
Like the Bermuda Triangle, nobody ever reports back from there.
(Laughter) In the first place, it's not so easy to even find your vagina.
Women go days, weeks, months, without looking at it.
I interviewed a high-powered businesswoman; she told me she didn't have time.
"Looking at your vagina," she said, "is a full day's work."
(Laughter) "You've got to get down there on your back, in front of a mirror, full-length preferred.
You've got to get in the perfect position with the perfect light, which then becomes shadowed by the angle you're at.
You're twisting your head up, arching your back, it's exhausting."
She was busy; she didn't have time.
So I decided to talk to women about their vaginas.
They began as casual vagina interviews, and they turned into vagina monologues.
I talked with over 200 women.
I talked to older women, younger women, married women, lesbians, single women.
I talked to corporate professionals, college professors, actors, sex workers.
I talked to African-American women, Asian-American women, Native-American women, Caucasian women, Jewish women.
OK, at first women were a little shy, a little reluctant to talk.
Once they got going, you couldn't stop them.
Women love to talk about their vaginas, they do.
Mainly because no one's ever asked them before.
(Laughter) Let's just start with the word "vagina" -- vagina, vagina.
It sounds like an infection, at best.
"Hurry, nurse, bring the vagina!"
(Laughter) Vagina, vagina, vagina.
It doesn't matter how many times you say the word, it never sounds like a word you want to say.
It's a completely ridiculous, totally un-sexy word.
If you use it during sex, trying to be politically correct, "Darling, would you stroke my vagina," you kill the act right there.
(Laughter) I'm worried what we call them and don't call them.
In Great Neck, New York, they call it a Pussycat.
A woman told me there her mother used to tell her, "Don't wear panties, dear, underneath your pajamas.
You need to air out your Pussycat."
(Laughter) In Westchester, they call it a Pooki, in New Jersey, a twat.
There's Powderbox, derriere, a Pooky, a Poochi, a Poopi, a Poopelu, a Pooninana, a Padepachetchki, a Pal, and a Piche.
(Laughter) There's Toadie, Dee Dee, Nishi, Dignity, Coochi Snorcher, Cooter, Labbe, Gladys Seagelman, VA, Wee wee, Horsespot, Nappy Dugout, Mongo, Ghoulie, Powderbox, a Mimi in Miami, a Split Knish in Philadelphia ...
(Laughter) I am worried about vaginas.
This is how the "Vagina Monologues" begins.
But it really didn't begin there.
We were having a conversation about menopause, and we got onto the subject of her vagina, which you'll do if you're talking about menopause.
And she said things that really shocked me about her vagina -- that it was dried-up and finished and dead -- and I was kind of shocked.
So I said to a friend casually, "Well, what do you think about your vagina?"
And that woman said something more amazing, and then the next woman said something more amazing, and before I knew it, every woman was telling me I had to talk to somebody about their vagina because they had an amazing story, and I was sucked down the vagina trail.
(Laughter) And I really haven't gotten off of it.
I think if you had told me when I was younger that I was going to grow up, and be in shoe stores, and people would scream out, "There she is, the Vagina Lady!"
I don't know that that would have been my life ambition.
(Laughter) But I want to talk a little bit about happiness, and the relationship to this whole vagina journey, because it has been an extraordinary journey that began eight years ago.
I think before I did the "Vagina Monologues," I didn't really believe in happiness.
I thought that only idiots were happy, to be honest.
I remember when I started practicing Buddhism 14 years ago, and I was told that the end of this practice was to be happy, I said, "How could you be happy and live in this world of suffering and live in this world of pain?"
I mistook happiness for a lot of other things, like numbness or decadence or selfishness.
And what happened through the course of the "Vagina Monologues" and this journey is, I think I have come to understand a little bit more about happiness.
There are three qualities I want to talk about.
One is seeing what's right in front of you, and talking about it, and stating it.
I think what I learned from talking about the vagina and speaking about the vagina, is it was the most obvious thing -- it was right in the center of my body and the center of the world -- and yet it was the one thing nobody talked about.
The second thing is that what talking about the vagina did is it opened this door which allowed me to see that there was a way to serve the world to make it better.
And that's where the deepest happiness has actually come from.
And the third principle of happiness, which I've realized recently: Eight years ago, this momentum and this energy, this "V-wave" started -- and I can only describe it as a "V-wave" because, to be honest, I really don't understand it completely; I feel at the service of it.
But this wave started, and if I question the wave, or try to stop the wave or look back at the wave, I often have the experience of whiplash or the potential of my neck breaking.
But if I go with the wave, and I trust the wave and I move with the wave, I go to the next place, and it happens logically and organically and truthfully.
And I started this piece, particularly with stories and narratives, and I was talking to one woman and that led to another woman and that led to another woman.
And then I wrote those stories down, and I put them out in front of other people.
And every single time I did the show at the beginning, women would literally line up after the show, because they wanted to tell me their stories.
And at first I thought, "Oh great, I'll hear about wonderful orgasms, and great sex lives, and how women love their vaginas."
But in fact, that's not what women lined up to tell me.
What women lined up to tell me was how they were raped, and how they were battered, and how they were beaten, and how they were gang-raped in parking lots, and how they were incested by their uncles.
And I wanted to stop doing the "Vagina Monologues," because it felt too daunting.
I felt like a war photographer who takes pictures of terrible events, but doesn't intervene on their behalf.
And so in 1997, I said, "Let's get women together.
What could we do with this information that all these women are being violated?"
And it turned out, after thinking and investigating, that I discovered -- and the UN has actually said this recently -- that one out of every three women on this planet will be beaten or raped in her lifetime.
That's essentially a gender; that's essentially the resource of the planet, which is women.
So in 1997 we got all these incredible women together and we said, "How can we use the play, this energy, to stop violence against women?"
And we put on one event in New York City, in the theater, and all these great actors came -- from Susan Sarandon, to Glenn Close, to Whoopi Goldberg -- and we did one performance on one evening, and that catalyzed this wave, this energy.
And within five years, this extraordinary thing began to happen.
One woman took that energy and she said, "I want to bring this wave, this energy, to college campuses," and so she took the play and she said, "Let's use the play and have performances once a year, where we can raise money to stop violence against women in local communities all around the world."
And in one year, it went to 50 colleges, and then it expanded.
And over the course of the last six years, it's spread and it's spread and it's spread around the world.
What I have learned is two things: one, that the epidemic of violence towards women is shocking; it's global; it is so profound and it is so devastating, and it is so in every little pocket of every little crater, of every little society that we don't even recognize it, because it's become ordinary.
This journey has taken me to Afghanistan, where I had the extraordinary honor and privilege to go into parts of Afghanistan under the Taliban.
I was dressed in a burqa and I went in with an extraordinary group, called the Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan.
And I saw firsthand how women had been stripped of every single right that was possible to strip women of -- from being educated, to being employed, to being actually allowed to eat ice cream.
For those of you who don't know, it was illegal to eat ice cream under the Taliban.
And I actually saw and met women who had been flogged for being caught eating vanilla ice cream.
I was taken to the secret ice cream-eating place in a little town, where we went to a back room, and women were seated and a curtain was pulled around us, and they were served vanilla ice cream.
And women lifted their burqas and ate this ice cream.
And I don't think I ever understood pleasure until that moment, and how women have found a way to keep their pleasure alive.
It has taken me, this journey, to Islamabad, where I have witnessed and met women with their faces melted off.
It has taken me to Juarez, Mexico, where I was a week ago, where I have literally been there in parking lots, where bones of women have washed up and been dumped next to Coca-Cola bottles.
It has taken me to universities all over this country, where girls are date-raped and drugged.
I have seen terrible, terrible, terrible violence.
But I have also recognized, in the course of seeing that violence, that being in the face of things and seeing actually what's in front of us is the antidote to depression, and to a feeling that one is worthless and has no value.
Because before the "Vagina Monologues," I will say that 80 percent of my consciousness was closed off to what was really going on in this reality, and that closing-off closed off my vitality and my life energy.
What has also happened is in the course of these travels -- and it's been an extraordinary thing -- is that every single place that I have gone to in the world, I have met a new species.
And I really love hearing about all these species at the bottom of the sea.
And I was thinking about how being with these extraordinary people on this particular panel, that it's beneath, beyond and between, and the vagina kind of fits into all those categories.
(Laughter) But one of the things I've seen is this species -- and it is a species, and it is a new paradigm, and it doesn't get reported in the press or in the media because I don't think good news ever is news, and I don't think people who are transforming the planet are what gets the ratings on TV shows.
But every single country I have been to -- and in the last six years, I've been to about 45 countries, and many tiny little villages and cities and towns -- I have seen something what I've come to call "vagina warriors."
A "vagina warrior" is a woman, or a vagina-friendly man, who has witnessed incredible violence or suffered it, and rather than getting an AK-47 or a weapon of mass destruction or a machete, they hold the violence in their bodies; they grieve it; they experience it; and then they go out and devote their lives to making sure it doesn't happen to anybody else.
I have met these women everywhere on the planet, and I want to tell a few stories, because I believe that stories are the way that we transmit information, where it goes into our bodies.
And I think one of the things about being at TED that's been very interesting is that I live in my body a lot, and I don't live in my head very much anymore.
And this is a very heady place.
And it's been really interesting to be in my head for the last two days; I've been very disoriented -- (Laughter) because I think the world, the V-world, is very much in your body.
It's a body world, and the species really exists in the body.
And I think there's a real significance in us attaching our bodies to our heads, that that separation has created a divide that is often separating purpose from intent.
And the connection between body and head often brings those things into union.
I want to talk about three particular people that I've met, vagina warriors, who really transformed my understanding of this whole principle and species, and one is a woman named Marsha Lopez.
Marsha Lopez was a woman I met in Guatemala.
She was 14 years old, and she was in a marriage and her husband was beating her on a regular basis.
And she couldn't get out, because she was addicted to the relationship, and she had no money.
Her sister was younger than her, and she applied -- we had a "Stop Rape" contest a few years ago in New York -- and she applied, hoping that she would become a finalist and she could bring her sister.
She did become a finalist; she brought Marsha to New York.
And at that time, we did this extraordinary V-Day at Madison Square Garden, where we sold out the entire testosterone-filled dome -- 18,000 people standing up to say "Yes" to vaginas, which was really a pretty incredible transformation.
And she came, and she witnessed this, and she decided that she would go back and leave her husband, and that she would bring V-Day to Guatemala.
She was 21 years old.
I went to Guatemala and she had sold out the National Theater of Guatemala.
And I watched her walk up on stage in her red short dress and high heels, and she stood there and said, "My name is Marsha.
I was beaten by my husband for five years. He almost murdered me.
I left and you can, too."
And the entire 2,000 people went absolutely crazy.
There's a woman named Esther Chávez who I met in Juarez, Mexico.
And Esther Chávez was a brilliant accountant in Mexico City.
She was 72 years old and she was planning to retire.
She went to Juarez to take care of an ailing aunt, and in the course of it, she began to discover what was happening to the murdered and disappeared women of Juarez.
She gave up her life; she moved to Juarez.
She started to write the stories which documented the disappeared women.
300 women have disappeared in a border town because they're brown and poor.
There has been no response to the disappearance, and not one person has been held accountable.
She began to document it.
She opened a center called Casa Amiga, and in six years, she has literally brought this to the consciousness of the world.
We were there a week ago, when there were 7,000 people in the street, and it was truly a miracle.
And as we walked through the streets, the people of Juarez, who normally don't even come into the streets, because the streets are so dangerous, literally stood there and wept, to see that other people from the world had showed up for that particular community.
There's another woman, named Agnes.
And Agnes, for me, epitomizes what a vagina warrior is.
I met her three years ago in Kenya.
And Agnes was mutilated as a little girl; she was circumcised against her will when she was 10 years old, and she really made a decision that she didn't want this practice to continue anymore in her community.
So when she got older, she created this incredible thing: it's an anatomical sculpture of a woman's body, half a woman's body.
And she walked through the Rift Valley, and she had vagina and vagina replacement parts, where she would teach girls and parents and boys and girls what a healthy vagina looks like, and what a mutilated vagina looks like.
And in the course of her travel -- she walked literally for eight years through the Rift Valley, through dust, through sleeping on the ground, because the Maasai are nomads, and she would have to find them, and they would move, and she would find them again -- she saved 1,500 girls from being cut.
And in that time, she created an alternative ritual, which involved girls coming of age without the cut.
When we met her three years ago, we said, "What could V-Day do for you?"
And she said, "Well, if you got me a jeep, I could get around a lot faster."
(Laughter) So we bought her a jeep.
And in the year that she had the jeep, she saved 4,500 girls from being cut.
So we said to her, "What else could we do for you?"
She said, "Well, Eve, if you gave me some money, I could open a house and girls could run away, and they could be saved."
And I want to tell this little story about my own beginnings, because it's very interrelated to happiness and Agnes.
When I was a little girl -- I grew up in a wealthy community; it was an upper-middle class white community, and it had all the trappings and the looks of a perfectly nice, wonderful, great life.
And everyone was supposed to be happy in that community, and, in fact, my life was hell.
I lived with an alcoholic father who beat me and molested me, and it was all inside that.
And always as a child I had this fantasy that somebody would come and rescue me.
And I actually made up a little character whose name was Mr. Alligator.
I would call him up when things got really bad, and say it was time to come and pick me up.
And I would pack a little bag and wait for Mr. Alligator to come.
Now, Mr. Alligator never did come, but the idea of Mr. Alligator coming actually saved my sanity and made it OK for me to keep going, because I believed, in the distance, there would be someone coming to rescue me.
Cut to 40-some odd years later, we go to Kenya, and we're walking, we arrive at the opening of this house.
And Agnes hadn't let me come to the house for days, because they were preparing this whole ritual.
When Agnes first started fighting to stop female genital mutilation in her community, she had become an outcast, and she was exiled and slandered, and the whole community turned against her.
But being a vagina warrior, she kept going, and she kept committing herself to transforming consciousness.
And in the Maasai community, goats and cows are the most valued possession.
They're like the Mercedes-Benz of the Rift Valley.
And she said two days before the house opened, two different people arrived to give her a goat each, and she said to me, "I knew then that female genital mutilation would end one day in Africa."
Anyway, we arrived, and when we arrived, there were hundreds of girls dressed in red homemade dresses -- which is the color of the Maasai and the color of V-Day -- and they greeted us.
They had made up these songs that they were singing, about the end of suffering and the end of mutilation, and they walked us down the path.
It was a gorgeous day in the African sun, and the dust was flying and the girls were dancing, and there was this house, and it said, "V-Day Safe House for the Girls."
And it hit me in that moment that it had taken 47 years, but that Mr. Alligator had finally shown up.
And he had shown up, obviously, in a form that it took me a long time to understand, which is that when we give in the world what we want the most, we heal the broken part inside each of us.
And I feel, in the last eight years, that this journey -- this miraculous vagina journey -- has taught me this really simple thing, which is that happiness exists in action; it exists in telling the truth and saying what your truth is; and it exists in giving away what you want the most.
And I feel that knowledge and that journey has been an extraordinary privilege, and I feel really blessed to have been here today to communicate that to you.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
My name is Jonathan Zittrain, and in my recent work I've been a bit of a pessimist.
So I thought this morning I would try to be the optimist, and give reason to hope for the future of the Internet by drawing upon its present.
Now, it may seem like there is less hope today than there was before.
People are less kind. There is less trust around.
I don't know. As a simple example, we could run a test here.
How many people have ever hitchhiked?
I know. How many people have hitchhiked within the past 10 years?
Right. So what has changed?
It's not better public transportation.
So that's one reason to think that we might be declensionists, going in the wrong direction.
But I want to give you three examples to try to say that the trend line is in fact in the other direction, and it's the Internet helping it along.
So example number one: the Internet itself.
These are three of the founders of the Internet.
They were actually high school classmates together at the same high school in suburban Los Angles in the 1960s.
You might have had a French club or a Debate club.
They had a "Let's build a global network" club, and it worked out very well.
They are pictured here for their 25th anniversary Newsweek retrospective on the Internet.
And as you can tell, they are basically goof balls.
They had one great limitation and one great freedom as they tried to conceive of a global network.
The limitation was that they didn't have any money.
No particular amount of capital to invest, of the sort that for a physical network you might need for trucks and people and a hub to move packages around overnight.
They had none of that.
But they had an amazing freedom, which was they didn't have to make any money from it.
The Internet has no business plan, never did.
No CEO, no firm responsible, singly, for building it.
Instead, it's folks getting together to do something for fun, rather than because they were told to, or because they were expecting to make a mint off of it.
That ethos led to a network architecture, a structure that was unlike other digital networks then or since.
So unusual, in fact, that it was said that it's not clear the Internet could work.
As late as 1992, IBM was known to say you couldn't possibly build a corporate network using Internet Protocol.
And even some Internet engineers today say the whole thing is a pilot project and the jury is still out.
(Laughter) That's why the mascot of Internet engineering, if it had one, is said to be the bumblebee.
Because the fur-to-wingspan ratio of the bumblebee is far too large for it to be able to fly.
And yet, mysteriously, somehow the bee flies.
I'm pleased to say that, thanks to massive government funding, about three years ago we finally figured out how bees fly.
(Laughter) It's very complicated, but it turns out they flap their wings very quickly.
(Laughter) So what is this bizarre architecture configuration that makes the network sing and be so unusual?
Well, to move data around from one place to another -- again, it's not like a package courier.
It's more like a mosh pit.
(Laughter) Imagine, you being part of a network where, you're maybe at a sporting event, and you're sitting in rows like this, and somebody asks for a beer, and it gets handed at the aisle.
And your neighborly duty is to pass the beer along, at risk to your own trousers, to get it to the destination.
No one pays you to do this.
It's just part of your neighborly duty.
And, in a way, that's exactly how packets move around the Internet, sometimes in as many as 25 or 30 hops, with the intervening entities that are passing the data around having no particular contractual or legal obligation to the original sender or to the receiver.
Now, of course, in a mosh pit it's hard to specify a destination.
You need a lot of trust, but it's not like, "I'm trying to get to Pensacola, please."
So the Internet needs addressing and directions.
It turns out there is no one overall map of the Internet.
Instead, again, it is as if we are all sitting together in a theater, but we can only see amidst the fog the people immediately around us.
So what do we do to figure out who is where?
We turn to the person on the right, and we tell that person what we see on our left, and vice versa.
And they can lather, rinse, repeat. And before you know it, you have a general sense of where everything is.
This is how Internet addressing and routing actually work.
This is a system that relies on kindness and trust, which also makes it very delicate and vulnerable.
In rare but striking instances, a single lie told by just one entity in this honeycomb can lead to real trouble.
So, for example, last year, the government of Pakistan asked its Internet service providers there to prevent citizens of Pakistan from seeing YouTube.
There was a video there that the government did not like and they wanted to make sure it was blocked.
This is a common occurrence. Governments everywhere are often trying to block and filter and censor content on the Internet.
Well this one ISP in Pakistan chose to effectuate the block for its subscribers in a rather unusual way.
It advertised -- the way that you might be asked, if you were part of the Internet, to declare what you see near you -- it advertised that near it, in fact, it had suddenly awakened to find that it was YouTube.
"That's right," it said, "I am YouTube."
Which meant that packets of data from subscribers going to YouTube stopped at the ISP, since they thought they were already there, and the ISP threw them away unopened because the point was to block it.
But it didn't stop there.
You see, that announcement went one click out, which got reverberated, one click out.
And it turns out that as you look at the postmortem of this event, you have at one moment perfectly working YouTube.
Then, at moment number two, you have the fake announcement go out.
And within two minutes, it reverberates around and YouTube is blocked everywhere in the world.
If you were sitting in Oxford, England, trying to get to YouTube, your packets were going to Pakistan and they weren't coming back.
Now just think about that.
One of the most popular websites in the world, run by the most powerful company in the world, and there was nothing that YouTube or Google were particularly privileged to do about it.
And yet, somehow, within about two hours, the problem was fixed.
How did this happen?
Well, for a big clue, we turn to NANOG.
The North American Network Operators Group, a group of people who, on a beautiful day outside, enter into a windowless room, at their terminals reading email and messages in fixed proportion font, like this, and they talk about networks.
And some of them are mid-level employees at Internet service providers around the world.
And here is the message where one of them says, "Looks like we've got a live one. We have a hijacking of YouTube!
This is not a drill. It's not just the cluelessness of YouTube engineers. I promise.
Something is up in Pakistan."
And they came together to help find the problem and fix it.
So it's kind of like if your house catches on fire.
The bad news is there is no fire brigade.
The good news is random people apparate from nowhere, put out the fire and leave without expecting payment or praise.
(Applause) I was trying to think of the right model to describe this form of random acts of kindness by geeky strangers.
(Laughter) You know, it's just like the hail goes out and people are ready to help.
And it turns out this model is everywhere, once you start looking for it.
Example number two: Wikipedia.
If a man named Jimbo came up to you in 2001 and said, "I've got a great idea! We start with seven articles that anybody can edit anything, at any time, and we'll get a great encyclopedia! Eh?"
Right. Dumbest idea ever.
(Laughter) In fact, Wikipedia is an idea so profoundly stupid that even Jimbo never had it.
Jimbo's idea was for Nupedia.
It was going to be totally traditional. He would pay people money because he was feeling like a good guy, and the money would go to the people and they would write the articles.
The wiki was introduced so others could make suggestions on edits -- as almost an afterthought, a back room.
And then it turns out the back room grew to encompass the entire project.
And today, Wikipedia is so ubiquitous that you can now find it on Chinese restaurant menus.
(Laughter) I am not making this up.
(Laughter) I have a theory I can explain later.
Suffice it to say for now that I prefer my Wikipedia stir-fried with pimentos.
(Laughter) But now, Wikipedia doesn't just spontaneously work.
How does it really work? It turns out there is a back room that is kind of windowless, metaphorically speaking.
And there are a bunch of people who, on a sunny day, would rather be inside and monitoring this, the administrator's notice board, itself a wiki page that anyone can edit.
And you just bring your problems to the page.
It's reminiscent of the description of history as "one damn thing after another," right?
Number one: "Tendentious editing by user Andyvphil."
Apologies, Andyvphil, if you're here today.
I'm not taking sides.
"Anon attacking me for reverting."
Here is my favorite: "A long story."
(Laughter) It turns out there are more people checking this page for problems and wanting to solve them than there are problems arising on the page.
And that's what keeps Wikipedia afloat.
At all times, Wikipedia is approximately 45 minutes away from utter destruction. Right?
There are spambots crawling it, trying to turn every article into an ad for a Rolex watch.
(Laughter) It's this thin geeky line that keeps it going.
Not because it's a job, not because it's a career, but because it's a calling.
It's something they feel impelled to do because they care about it.
They even gather together in such groups as the Counter-Vandalism Unit -- "Civility, Maturity, Responsibility" -- to just clean up the pages.
It does make you wonder if there were, for instance, a massive, extremely popular Star Trek convention one weekend, who would be minding the store?
(Laughter) So what we see -- (Laughter) what we see in this phenomenon is something that the crazed, late traffic engineer Hans Monderman discovered in the Netherlands, and here in South Kensington, that sometimes if you remove some of the external rules and signs and everything else, you can actually end up with a safer environment in which people can function, and one in which they are more human with each other.
They're realizing that they have to take responsibility for what they do.
And Wikipedia has embraced this.
Some of you may remember Star Wars Kid, the poor teenager who filmed himself with a golf ball retriever, acting as if it were a light saber.
The film, without his permission or even knowledge at first, found its way onto the Internet.
Hugely viral video. Extremely popular.
Totally mortifying to him.
Now, it being encyclopedic and all, Wikipedia had to do an article about Star Wars Kid.
Every article on Wikipedia has a corresponding discussion page, and on the discussion page they had extensive argument among the Wikipedians as to whether to have his real name featured in the article.
You could see arguments on both sides.
Here is just a snapshot of some of them.
They eventually decided -- not unanimously by any means -- not to include his real name, despite the fact that nearly all media reports did.
They just didn't think it was the right thing to do.
It was an act of kindness.
And to this day, the page for Star Wars Kid has a warning right at the top that says you are not to put his real name on the page.
If you do, it will be removed immediately, removed by people who may have disagreed with the original decision, but respect the outcome and work to make it stay because they believe in something bigger than their own opinion.
As a lawyer, I've got to say these guys are inventing the law and stare decisis and stuff like that as they go along.
Now, this isn't just limited to Wikipedia.
We see it on blogs all over the place.
I mean, this is a 2005 Business Week cover.
Wow. Blogs are going to change your business.
I know they look silly. And sure they look silly.
They start off on all sorts of goofy projects.
This is my favorite goofy blog: Catsthatlooklikehitler.com.
(Laughter) You send in a picture of your cat if it looks like Hitler.
(Laughter) Yeah, I know. Number four, it's like, can you imagine coming home to that cat everyday?
(Laughter) But then, you can see the same kind of whimsy applied to people.
So this is a blog devoted to unfortunate portraiture.
This one says, "Bucolic meadow with split-rail fence.
Is that an animal carcass behind her?"
(Laughter) You're like, "You know? I think that's an animal carcass behind her."
And it's one after the other.
But then you hit this one. Image removed at request of owner.
That's it. Image removed at request of owner.
It turns out that somebody lampooned here wrote to the snarky guy that does the site, not with a legal threat, not with an offer of payment, but just said, "Hey, would you mind?"
The person said, "No, that's fine."
I believe we can build architectures online to make such human requests that much easier to do, to make it possible for all of us to see that the data we encounter online is just stuff on which to click and paste and copy and forward that actually represents human emotion and endeavor and impact, and to be able to have an ethical moment where we decide how we want to treat it.
I even think it can go into the real world.
We can end up, as we get in a world with more censors -- everywhere there is something filming you, maybe putting it online -- to be able to have a little clip you could wear that says, "You know, I'd rather not."
And then have technology that the person taking the photo will know later, this person requested to be contacted before this goes anywhere big, if you don't mind.
And that person taking the photo can make a decision about how and whether to respect it.
In the real world, we see filtering of this sort taking place in Pakistan.
And we now have means that we can build, like this system, so that people can report the filtering as they encounter it.
And it's no longer just a "I don't know. I couldn't get there. I guess I'll move on," but suddenly a collective consciousness about what is blocked and censored where online.
In fact, talk about technology imitating life imitating tech, or maybe it's the other way around.
An NYU researcher here took little cardboard robots with smiley faces on them, and a motor that just drove them forward and a flag sticking out the back with a desired destination.
It said, "Can you help me get there?"
Released it on the streets of Manhattan.
(Laughter) They'll fund anything these days.
Here is the chart of over 43 people helping to steer the robot that could not steer and get it on its way, from one corner from one corner of Washington Square Park to another.
That leads to example number three: hitchhiking.
I'm not so sure hitchhiking is dead.
Why? There is the Craigslist rideshare board.
If it were called the Craigslist hitchhiking board, tumbleweeds would be blowing through it.
But it's the rideshare board, and it's basically the same thing.
Now why are people using it?
I don't know. Maybe they think that, uh, killers don't plan ahead?
(Laughter) No. I think the actual answer is that once you reframe it, once you get out of one set of stale expectations from a failed project that had its day, but now, for whatever reason, is tarnished, you can actually rekindle the kind of human kindness and sharing that something like this on Craigslist represents.
And then you can highlight it into something like, yes, CouchSurfing.org.
CouchSurfing: one guy's idea to, at last, put together people who are going somewhere far away and would like to sleep on a stranger's couch for free, with people who live far away, and would like someone they don't know to sleep on their couch for free.
It's a brilliant idea.
It's a bee that, yes, flies.
Amazing how many successful couch surfings there have been.
And if you're wondering, no, there have been no known fatalities associated with CouchSurfing.
Although, to be sure, the reputation system, at the moment, works that you leave your report after the couch surfing experience, so there may be some selection bias there.
(Laughter) So, my urging, my thought, is that the Internet isn't just a pile of information.
It's not a noun. It's a verb.
And when you go on it, if you listen and see carefully and closely enough, what you will discover is that that information is saying something to you.
What it's saying to you is what we heard yesterday, Demosthenes was saying to us.
It's saying, "Let's march." Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Good morning. I think, as a grumpy Eastern European, I was brought in to play the pessimist this morning. So bear with me.
Well, I come from the former Soviet Republic of Belarus, which, as some of you may know, is not exactly an oasis of liberal democracy.
So that's why I've always been fascinated with how technology could actually reshape and open up authoritarian societies like ours.
So, I'm graduating college and, feeling very idealistic, I decided to join the NGO which actually was using new media to promote democracy and media reform in much of the former Soviet Union.
However, to my surprise, I discovered that dictatorships do not crumble so easily.
In fact, some of them actually survived the Internet challenge, and some got even more repressive.
So this is when I ran out of my idealism and decided to quit my NGO job and actually study how the Internet could impede democratization.
Now, I must tell you that this was never a very popular argument, and it's probably not very popular yet with some of you sitting in this audience.
It was never popular with many political leaders, especially those in the United States who somehow thought that new media would be able to do what missiles couldn't.
That is, promote democracy in difficult places where everything else has already been tried and failed.
And I think by 2009, this news has finally reached Britain, so I should probably add Gordon Brown to this list as well.
However, there is an underlying argument about logistics, which has driven so much of this debate. Right?
So if you look at it close enough, you'll actually see that much of this is about economics.
The cybertopians say, much like fax machines and Xerox machines did in the '80s, blogs and social networks have radically transformed the economics of protest, so people would inevitably rebel.
To put it very simply, the assumption so far has been that if you give people enough connectivity, if you give them enough devices, democracy will inevitably follow.
And to tell you the truth, I never really bought into this argument, in part because I never saw three American presidents agree on anything else in the past.
(Laughter) But, you know, even beyond that, if you think about the logic underlying it, is something I call iPod liberalism, where we assume that every single Iranian or Chinese who happens to have and love his iPod will also love liberal democracy.
And again, I think this is kind of false.
But I think a much bigger problem with this is that this logic -- that we should be dropping iPods not bombs -- I mean, it would make a fascinating title for Thomas Friedman's new book.
(Laughter) But this is rarely a good sign. Right?
So, the bigger problem with this logic is that it confuses the intended versus the actual uses of technology.
For those of you who think that new media of the Internet could somehow help us avert genocide, should look no further than Rwanda, where in the '90s it was actually two radio stations which were responsible for fueling much of the ethnic hatred in the first place.
But even beyond that, coming back to the Internet, what you can actually see is that certain governments have mastered the use of cyberspace for propaganda purposes. Right?
And they are building what I call the Spinternet.
The combination of spin, on the one hand, and the Internet on the other.
So governments from Russia to China to Iran are actually hiring, training and paying bloggers in order to leave ideological comments and create a lot of ideological blog posts to comment on sensitive political issues. Right?
So you may wonder, why on Earth are they doing it?
Why are they engaging with cyberspace?
Well my theory is that it's happening because censorship actually is less effective than you think it is in many of those places.
The moment you put something critical in a blog, even if you manage to ban it immediately, it will still spread around thousands and thousands of other blogs.
So the more you block it, the more it emboldens people to actually avoid the censorship and thus win in this cat-and-mouse game.
So the only way to control this message is actually to try to spin it and accuse anyone who has written something critical of being, for example, a CIA agent.
And, again, this is happening quite often.
Just to give you an example of how it works in China, for example.
There was a big case in February 2009 called "Elude the Cat."
And for those of you who didn't know, I'll just give a little summary.
So what happened is that a 24-year-old man, a Chinese man, died in prison custody.
And police said that it happened because he was playing hide and seek, which is "elude the cat" in Chinese slang, with other inmates and hit his head against the wall, which was not an explanation which sat well with many Chinese bloggers.
So they immediately began posting a lot of critical comments.
In fact, QQ.com, which is a popular Chinese website, had 35,000 comments on this issue within hours.
But then authorities did something very smart.
Instead of trying to purge these comments, they instead went and reached out to the bloggers.
And they basically said, "Look guys. We'd like you to become netizen investigators."
So 500 people applied, and four were selected to actually go and tour the facility in question, and thus inspect it and then blog about it.
Within days the entire incident was forgotten, which would have never happened if they simply tried to block the content.
People would keep talking about it for weeks.
And this actually fits with another interesting theory about what's happening in authoritarian states and in their cyberspace.
This is what political scientists call authoritarian deliberation, and it happens when governments are actually reaching out to their critics and letting them engage with each other online.
We tend to think that somehow this is going to harm these dictatorships, but in many cases it only strengthens them.
And you may wonder why.
I'll just give you a very short list of reasons why authoritarian deliberation may actually help the dictators.
And first it's quite simple.
Most of them operate in a complete information vacuum.
They don't really have the data they need in order to identify emerging threats facing the regime.
So encouraging people to actually go online and share information and data on blogs and wikis is great because otherwise, low level apparatchiks and bureaucrats will continue concealing what's actually happening in the country, right?
So from this perspective, having blogs and wikis produce knowledge has been great.
Secondly, involving public in any decision making is also great because it helps you to share the blame for the policies which eventually fail.
Because they say, "Well look, we asked you, we consulted you, you voted on it.
You put it on the front page of your blog.
Well, great. You are the one who is to blame."
And finally, the purpose of any authoritarian deliberation efforts is usually to increase the legitimacy of the regimes, both at home and abroad.
So inviting people to all sorts of public forums, having them participate in decision making, it's actually great.
Because what happens is that then you can actually point to this initiative and say, "Well, we are having a democracy. We are having a forum."
Just to give you an example, one of the Russian regions, for example, now involves its citizens in planning its strategy up until year 2020.
Right? So they can go online and contribute ideas on what that region would look like by the year 2020.
I mean, anyone who has been to Russia would know that there was no planning in Russia for the next month.
So having people involved in planning for 2020 is not necessarily going to change anything, because the dictators are still the ones who control the agenda.
Just to give you an example from Iran, we all heard about the Twitter revolution that happened there, but if you look close enough, you'll actually see that many of the networks and blogs and Twitter and Facebook were actually operational.
They may have become slower, but the activists could still access it and actually argue that having access to them is actually great for many authoritarian states.
And it's great simply because they can gather open source intelligence.
In the past it would take you weeks, if not months, to identify how Iranian activists connect to each other.
Now you actually know how they connect to each other by looking at their Facebook page.
I mean KGB, and not just KGB, used to torture in order to actually get this data.
Now it's all available online.
(Laughter) But I think the biggest conceptual pitfall that cybertopians made is when it comes to digital natives, people who have grown up online.
We often hear about cyber activism, how people are getting more active because of the Internet.
Rarely hear about cyber hedonism, for example, how people are becoming passive.
Why? Because they somehow assume that the Internet is going to be the catalyst of change that will push young people into the streets, while in fact it may actually be the new opium for the masses which will keep the same people in their rooms downloading pornography.
That's not an option being considered too strongly.
So for every digital renegade that is revolting in the streets of Tehran, there may as well be two digital captives who are actually rebelling only in the World of Warcraft.
And this is realistic. And there is nothing wrong about it because the Internet has greatly empowered many of these young people and it plays a completely different social role for them.
If you look at some of the surveys on how the young people actually benefit from the Internet, you'll see that the number of teenagers in China, for example, for whom the Internet actually broadens their sex life, is three times more than in the United States.
So it does play a social role, however it may not necessarily lead to political engagement.
So the way I tend to think of it is like a hierarchy of cyber-needs in space, a total rip-off from Abraham Maslow.
But the point here is that when we get the remote Russian village online, what will get people to the Internet is not going to be the reports from Human Rights Watch.
It's going to be pornography, "Sex and the City," or maybe watching funny videos of cats.
So this is something you have to recognize.
So what should we do about it?
Well I say we have to stop thinking about the number of iPods per capita and start thinking about ways in which we can empower intellectuals, dissidents, NGOs and then the members of civil society.
Because even what has been happening up 'til now with the Spinternet and authoritarian deliberation, there is a great chance that those voices will not be heard.
So I think we should shatter some of our utopian assumptions and actually start doing something about it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So here we are.
I'm at home, as I'm sure many of you are, too.
And we've all begun to understand how our relationship with ourselves, with each other and the spaces we exist in can deeply impact our sense of identity and purpose.
So much has dramatically changed.
There's a sense of distance now unlike ever before.
But what if I told you that you could find a way from your heart to your hand to reconnect again, and that through this practice and embracing this cause, I could help you to recalibrate your mind so that you could explore this new reality with joy, enthusiasm, imagination and hope?
And all it would take is a simple pen.
To get you there, let's go back to the beginning.
As a kid growing up in a council estate in Southeast London, I was an outsider.
I'm the oldest of six kids, and all of my siblings look very English: blond hair, blue eyes, very cute.
And then there was me: half Nigerian, brown, with an Afro.
So what happens when you look different and you feel different, and in many ways, start to think differently from everyone and everything around you?
How do you find your way out of a dark, racist, homophobic and very lonely place?
This is where the pen comes in.
I started to draw.
So as you can see, I've got this pen, and it knows where it's going.
And I've learned very well how to follow it.
And the first thing I did is I followed this line, and I drew myself out of a culture that was only telling me what I couldn't do.
I trusted my pen, and it led me to Central Saint Martin's, a very fancy art school in London, where I graduated top of my year.
However, I soon realized there wasn't a place for me in London, because whether you wish to believe it or not, England is still a country that is rooted and functions within the class system.
And as a young, black, gay female artist from a working-class family, I didn't stand a chance.
So I left London and I moved to Japan, where I didn't experience people asking me where I was really from.
I was just another gaijin, which, ironically, means "outsider."
I was immersed in a culture that honors both making and craft, where people perfect their craft over generations.
It's a culture that masters both time and space, so that artists can truly create with freedom.
And what I discovered was a place I wasn't angry with.
Tokyo hadn't wronged me in any way.
I could no longer create with anger or out of pain.
I had to bravely allow myself to create from a different place.
And what I found is this incredible tool transcended a line on paper.
I found this thing that connected my head to my heart and my hand to everything.
I could see the world in new ways.
I found connections in corners and the solutions to problems I never knew existed.
It's like the world with all its positive and negative spaces could now be seen.
And just by seeing it, there was no longer any fear.
It's like my pen was a flashlight, and the unknown was still there, but it wasn't scary.
After five years of living in Japan and focusing on my craft, I felt like I needed a new challenge.
So I moved to New York, because that's what you do as an artist, right?
You move to the greatest city in the world that has the ability to make you feel completely and utterly invisible.
This is when I began to truly ask myself, "Who are you?"
I would wake up in the morning, and before I began my day, I would meditate on this.
And with this question in mind, I kept drawing.
I followed the line.
I let it lead the way.
The process of picking up a pen, something everyone has access to, the act of giving myself permission to let go of all thoughts, all fears, insecurities -- anything that would get in the way of allowing myself to be completely me -- that became my way of experiencing freedom.
When I got to New York, I didn't want to play by the rules of the art world.
I continued my practice as an outsider.
I kept drawing.
Curiosity became the ink for my pen, and I continued to dive deeper.
Over time, I began to create a bold, confident space for myself, a space that was all my own.
Initially, it was just my bedroom.
But that bedroom ended up in "The New York Times," and suddenly, I was being seen and known for this world I had created.
Since then, I've created and collaborated with some of the most unique artists, institutions and spaces, from the screens of Times Square, to the New York City Ballet for their incredible artist series, where I interviewed a number of dancers.
Their stories and words became the foundation of over 30 drawings and artworks, which took over the promenade walls, windows and floors.
For a long time, I wanted to create a space for contemplation and poetry.
And in 2019, I was given the opportunity to do just that by the Trust of Governor's Island.
They provided me with the perfect canvas in the form of a former military chapel.
Meet "The May Room."
With drawings on the exterior inspired by the history of the island, you walk inside, you take your shoes off, and there's a drawing on the floor in the form of a maze that brings you back to you.
It's an invitation to become calm.
And this allows you to see phrases on the wall.
"May you be wise."
"May you sleep soundly at night."
"May we save trees."
"May you," "may you," "may we."
And these phrases seem like they're rising from you or falling into you.
I've let my lines become much like a language, a language that has unfolded much like life.
And when there has been silence, I've sought connection through conversation, asking questions to push through the discomfort.
Drawing has taught me how to create my own rules.
It has taught me to open my eyes to see not only what is, but what can be.
And where there are broken systems, we can create new ones that actually function and benefit all, instead of just a select few.
Drawing has taught me how to fully engage with the world.
And what I've come to realize through this language of lines is not the importance of being seen, but rather the gift of seeing that we give to others and how true freedom is the ability to see.
And I don't mean that literally, because sight is only one way in which one can see.
But what I mean is to experience the world in its entirety, maybe even more so during the most challenging moments like the one we face today.
I'm Shantell Martin.
I draw.
And I invite you to pick up a pen and see where it takes you.
(Music)
Thank you.
Two years ago, I stood on the TED stage in Arusha, Tanzania.
I spoke very briefly about one of my proudest creations.
It was a simple machine that changed my life.
Before that time, I had never been away from my home in Malawi.
I had never used a computer.
I had never seen an Internet.
On the stage that day, I was so nervous.
My English lost, I wanted to vomit.
(Laughter) I had never been surrounded by so many azungu, white people.
(Laughter) There was a story I wouldn't tell you then.
But well, I'm feeling good right now.
I would like to share that story today.
We have seven children in my family.
All sisters, excepting me.
This is me with my dad when I was a little boy.
Before I discovered the wonders of science, I was just a simple farmer in a country of poor farmers.
Like everyone else, we grew maize.
One year our fortune turned very bad.
In 2001 we experienced an awful famine.
Within five months all Malawians began to starve to death.
My family ate one meal per day, at night.
Only three swallows of nsima for each one of us.
The food passes through our bodies.
We drop down to nothing.
In Malawi, the secondary school, you have to pay school fees.
Because of the hunger, I was forced to drop out of school.
I looked at my father and looked at those dry fields.
It was the future I couldn't accept.
I felt very happy to be at the secondary school, so I was determined to do anything possible to receive education.
So I went to a library.
I read books, science books, especially physics.
I couldn't read English that well.
I used diagrams and pictures to learn the words around them.
Another book put that knowledge in my hands.
It said a windmill could pump water and generate electricity.
Pump water meant irrigation, a defense against hunger, which we were experiencing by that time.
So I decided I would build one windmill for myself.
But I didn't have materials to use, so I went to a scrap yard where I found my materials.
Many people, including my mother, said I was crazy.
(Laughter) I found a tractor fan, shock absorber, PVC pipes.
Using a bicycle frame and an old bicycle dynamo, I built my machine.
It was one light at first.
And then four lights, with switches, and even a circuit breaker, modeled after an electric bell.
Another machine pumps water for irrigation.
Queues of people start lining up at my house (Laughter) to charge their mobile phone.
(Applause) I could not get rid of them.
(Laughter) And the reporters came too, which lead to bloggers and which lead to a call from something called TED.
I had never seen an airplane before.
I had never slept in a hotel.
So, on stage that day in Arusha, my English lost, I said something like, "I tried. And I made it."
So I would like to say something to all the people out there like me to the Africans, and the poor who are struggling with your dreams.
God bless.
Maybe one day you will watch this on the Internet.
I say to you, trust yourself and believe.
Whatever happens, don't give up.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Okay, so 90 percent of my photographic process is, in fact, not photographic.
It involves a campaign of letter writing, research and phone calls to access my subjects, which can range from Hamas leaders in Gaza to a hibernating black bear in its cave in West Virginia.
And oddly, the most notable letter of rejection I ever received came from Walt Disney World, a seemingly innocuous site.
And it read -- I'm just going to read a key sentence: "Especially during these violent times, I personally believe that the magical spell cast upon guests who visit our theme parks is particularly important to protect and helps to provide them with an important fantasy they can escape to."
Photography threatens fantasy.
They didn't want to let my camera in because it confronts constructed realities, myths and beliefs, and provides what appears to be evidence of a truth.
But there are multiple truths attached to every image, depending on the creator's intention, the viewer and the context in which it is presented.
Over a five year period following September 11th, when the American media and government were seeking hidden and unknown sites beyond its borders, most notably weapons of mass destruction, I chose to look inward at that which was integral to America's foundation, mythology and daily functioning.
I wanted to confront the boundaries of the citizen, self-imposed and real, and confront the divide between privileged and public access to knowledge.
It was a critical moment in American history and global history where one felt they didn't have access to accurate information.
And I wanted to see the center with my own eyes, but what I came away with is a photograph.
And it's just another place from which to observe, and the understanding that there are no absolute, all-knowing insiders.
And the outsider can never really reach the core.
I'm going to run through some of the photographs in this series.
It's titled, "An American Index of the Hidden and Unfamiliar," and it's comprised of nearly 70 images.
In this context I'll just show you a few.
This is a nuclear waste storage and encapsulation facility at Hanford site in Washington State, where there are over 1,900 stainless steel capsules containing nuclear waste submerged in water.
A human standing in front of an unprotected capsule would die instantly.
And I found one section amongst all of these that actually resembled the outline of the United States of America, which you can see here.
And a big part of the work that is sort of absent in this context is text.
So I create these two poles.
Every image is accompanied with a very detailed factual text.
And what I'm most interested in is the invisible space between a text and its accompanying image, and how the image is transformed by the text and the text by the image.
So, at best, the image is meant to float away into abstraction and multiple truths and fantasy.
And then the text functions as this cruel anchor that kind of nails it to the ground.
But in this context I'm just going to read an abridged version of those texts.
This is a cryopreservation unit, and it holds the bodies of the wife and mother of cryonics pioneer Robert Ettinger, who hoped to be awoken one day to extended life in good health, with advancements in science and technology, all for the cost of 35 thousand dollars, for forever.
This is a 21-year-old Palestinian woman undergoing hymenoplasty.
Hymenoplasty is a surgical procedure which restores the virginal state, allowing her to adhere to certain cultural expectations regarding virginity and marriage.
So it essentially reconstructs a ruptured hymen, allowing her to bleed upon having sexual intercourse, to simulate the loss of virginity.
This is a jury simulation deliberation room, and you can see beyond that two-way mirror jury advisers standing in a room behind the mirror.
And they observe deliberations after mock trial proceedings so that they can better advise their clients how to adjust their trial strategy to have the outcome that they're hoping for.
This process costs 60,000 dollars.
This is a U.S. Customs and Border Protection room, a contraband room, at John F. Kennedy International Airport.
On that table you can see 48 hours' worth of seized goods from passengers entering in to the United States.
There is a pig's head and African cane rats.
And part of my photographic work is I'm not just documenting what's there.
I do take certain liberties and intervene.
And in this I really wanted it to resemble an early still-life painting, so I spent some time with the smells and items.
This is the exhibited art on the walls of the CIA in Langley, Virginia, their original headquarters building.
And the CIA has had a long history with both covert and public cultural diplomacy efforts.
And it's speculated that some of their interest in the arts was designed to counter Soviet communism and promote what it considered to be pro-American thoughts and aesthetics.
And one of the art forms that elicited the interest of the agency, and had thus come under question, is abstract expressionism.
This is the Forensic Anthropology Research Facility, and on a six acre plot there are approximately 75 cadavers at any given time that are being studied by forensic anthropologists and researchers who are interested in monitoring a rate of corpse decomposition.
And in this particular photograph the body of a young boy has been used to reenact a crime scene.
This is the only federally funded site where it is legal to cultivate cannabis for scientific research in the United States.
It's a research crop marijuana grow room.
And part of the work that I hope for is that there is a sort of disorienting entropy where you can't find any discernible formula in how these things -- they sort of awkwardly jump from government to science to religion to security -- and you can't completely understand how information is being distributed.
These are transatlantic submarine communication cables that travel across the floor of the Atlantic Ocean, connecting North America to Europe.
They carry over 60 million simultaneous voice conversations, and in a lot of the government and technology sites there was just this very apparent vulnerability.
This one is almost humorous because it feels like I could just snip all of that conversation in one easy cut.
But stuff did feel like it could have been taken 30 or 40 years ago, like it was locked in the Cold War era and hadn't necessarily progressed.
This is a Braille edition of Playboy magazine.
(Laughter) And this is ... a division of the Library of Congress produces a free national library service for the blind and visually impaired, and the publications they choose to publish are based on reader popularity.
And Playboy is always in the top few.
(Laughter) But you'd be surprised, they don't do the photographs. It's just the text.
(Laughter) This is an avian quarantine facility where all imported birds coming into America are required to undergo a 30-day quarantine, where they are tested for diseases including Exotic Newcastle Disease and Avian Influenza.
This film shows the testing of a new explosive fill on a warhead.
And the Air Armament Center at Eglin Air Force Base in Florida is responsible for the deployment and testing of all air-delivered weaponry coming from the United States.
And the film was shot on 72 millimeter, government-issue film.
And that red dot is a marking on the government-issue film.
All living white tigers in North America are the result of selective inbreeding -- that would be mother to son, father to daughter, sister to brother -- to allow for the genetic conditions that create a salable white tiger.
Meaning white fur, ice blue eyes, a pink nose.
And the majority of these white tigers are not born in a salable state and are killed at birth.
It's a very violent process that is little known.
And the white tiger is obviously celebrated in several forms of entertainment.
Kenny was born. He actually made it to adulthood.
He has since passed away, but was mentally retarded and suffers from severe bone abnormalities.
This, on a lighter note, is at George Lucas' personal archive.
This is the Death Star.
And it's shown here in its true orientation.
In the context of "Star Wars: Return of the Jedi," its mirror image is presented.
They flip the negative.
And you can see the photoetched brass detailing, and the painted acrylic facade.
In the context of the film, this is a deep-space battle station of the Galactic Empire, capable of annihilating planets and civilizations, and in reality it measures about four feet by two feet.
(Laughter) This is at Fort Campbell in Kentucky.
It's a Military Operations on Urbanized Terrain site.
Essentially they've simulated a city for urban combat, and this is one of the structures that exists in that city.
It's called the World Church of God.
It's supposed to be a generic site of worship.
And after I took this photograph, they constructed a wall around the World Church of God to mimic the set-up of mosques in Afghanistan or Iraq.
And I worked with Mehta Vihar who creates virtual simulations for the army for tactical practice.
And we put that wall around the World Church of God, and also used the characters and vehicles and explosions that are offered in the video games for the army.
And I put them into my photograph.
This is live HIV virus at Harvard Medical School, who is working with the U.S. Government to develop sterilizing immunity.
And Alhurra is a U.S. Government- sponsored Arabic language television network that distributes news and information to over 22 countries in the Arab world.
It runs 24 hours a day, commercial free.
However, it's illegal to broadcast Alhurra within the United States.
And in 2004, they developed a channel called Alhurra Iraq, which specifically deals with events occurring in Iraq and is broadcast to Iraq.
Now I'm going to move on to another project I did.
It's titled "The Innocents."
And for the men in these photographs, photography had been used to create a fantasy.
Contradicting its function as evidence of a truth, in these instances it furthered the fabrication of a lie.
I traveled across the United States photographing men and women who had been wrongfully convicted of crimes they did not commit, violent crimes.
I investigate photography's ability to blur truth and fiction, and its influence on memory, which can lead to severe, even lethal consequences.
For the men in these photographs, the primary cause of their wrongful conviction was mistaken identification.
A victim or eyewitness identifies a suspected perpetrator through law enforcement's use of images.
But through exposure to composite sketches, Polaroids, mug shots and line-ups, eyewitness testimony can change.
I'll give you an example from a case.
A woman was raped and presented with a series of photographs from which to identify her attacker.
She saw some similarities in one of the photographs, but couldn't quite make a positive identification.
Days later, she is presented with another photo array of all new photographs, except that one photograph that she had some draw to from the earlier array is repeated in the second array.
And a positive identification is made because the photograph replaced the memory, if there ever was an actual memory.
Photography offered the criminal justice system a tool that transformed innocent citizens into criminals, and the criminal justice system failed to recognize the limitations of relying on photographic identifications.
Frederick Daye, who is photographed at his alibi location, where 13 witnesses placed him at the time of the crime.
He was convicted by an all-white jury of rape, kidnapping and vehicle theft.
And he served 10 years of a life sentence.
Now DNA exonerated Frederick and it also implicated another man who was serving time in prison.
But the victim refused to press charges because she claimed that law enforcement had permanently altered her memory through the use of Frederick's photograph.
Charles Fain was convicted of kidnapping, rape and murder of a young girl walking to school.
He served 18 years of a death sentence.
I photographed him at the scene of the crime at the Snake River in Idaho.
And I photographed all of the wrongfully convicted at sites that came to particular significance in the history of their wrongful conviction.
The scene of arrest, the scene of misidentification, the alibi location.
And here, the scene of the crime, it's this place to which he's never been, but changed his life forever.
So photographing there, I was hoping to highlight the tenuous relationship between truth and fiction, in both his life and in photography.
Calvin Washington was convicted of capital murder.
He served 13 years of a life sentence in Waco, Texas.
Larry Mayes, I photographed at the scene of arrest, where he hid between two mattresses in Gary, Indiana, in this very room to hide from the police.
He ended up serving 18 and a half years of an 80 year sentence for rape and robbery.
The victim failed to identify Larry in two live lineups and then made a positive identification, days later, from a photo array.
Larry Youngblood served eight years of a 10 and half year sentence in Arizona for the abduction and repeated sodomizing of a 10 year old boy at a carnival.
He is photographed at his alibi location.
Ron Williamson. Ron was convicted of the rape and murder of a barmaid at a club, and served 11 years of a death sentence.
I photographed Ron at a baseball field because he had been drafted to the Oakland A's to play professional baseball just before his conviction.
And the state's key witness in Ron's case was, in the end, the actual perpetrator.
Ronald Jones served eight years of a death sentence for rape and murder of a 28-year-old woman.
I photographed him at the scene of arrest in Chicago.
William Gregory was convicted of rape and burglary.
He served seven years of a 70 year sentence in Kentucky.
Timothy Durham, who I photographed at his alibi location where 11 witnesses placed him at the time of the crime, was convicted of 3.5 years of a 3220 year sentence, for several charges of rape and robbery.
He had been misidentified by an 11-year-old victim.
Troy Webb is photographed here at the scene of the crime in Virginia.
He was convicted of rape, kidnapping and robbery, and served seven years of a 47 year sentence.
Troy's picture was in a photo array that the victim tentatively had some draw toward, but said he looked too old.
The police went and found a photograph of Troy Webb from four years earlier, which they entered into a photo array days later, and he was positively identified.
Now I'm going to leave you with a self portrait.
And it reiterates that distortion is a constant, and our eyes are easily deceived.
That's it. Thank you.
(Applause)
Clearly, we're living in a moment of crisis.
Arguably the financial markets have failed us and the aid system is failing us, and yet I stand firmly with the optimists who believe that there has probably never been a more exciting moment to be alive.
Because of some of technologies we've been talking about.
Because of the resources, the skills, and certainly the surge of talent we're seeing all around the world, with the mindset to create change.
And we've got a president who sees himself as a global citizen, who recognizes that no longer is there a single superpower, but that we've got to engage in a different way with the world.
And by definition, every one of you who is in this room must consider yourself a global soul, a global citizen.
You work on the front lines. And you've seen the best and the worst that human beings can do for one another and to one another.
And no matter what country you live or work in, you've also seen the extraordinary things that individuals are capable of, even in their most ordinariness.
Today there is a raging debate as to how best we lift people out of poverty, how best we release their energies.
On the one hand, we have people that say the aid system is so broken we need to throw it out.
And on the other we have people who say the problem is that we need more aid.
And what I want to talk about is something that compliments both systems.
We call it patient capital.
The critics point to the 500 billion dollars spent in Africa since 1970 and say, and what do we have but environmental degradation and incredible levels of poverty, rampant corruption?
They use Mobutu as metaphor.
And their policy prescription is to make government more accountable, focus on the capital markets, invest, don't give anything away.
On the other side, as I said, there are those who say the problem is that we need more money.
That when it comes to the rich, we'll bail out and we'll hand a lot of aid, but when it comes to our poor brethren, we want little to do with it.
They point to the successes of aid: the eradication of smallpox, and the distribution of tens of millions of malaria bed nets and antiretrovirals.
Both sides are right.
And the problem is that neither side is listening to the other.
Even more problematic, they're not listening to poor people themselves.
After 25 years of working on issues of poverty and innovation, it's true that there are probably no more market-oriented individuals on the planet than low-income people.
They must navigate markets daily, making micro-decisions, dozens and dozens, to move their way through society, and yet if a single catastrophic health problem impacts their family, they could be put back into poverty, sometimes for generations.
And so we need both the market and we need aid.
Patient capital works between, and tries to take the best of both.
It's money that's invested in entrepreneurs who know their communities and are building solutions to healthcare, water, housing, alternative energy, thinking of low income people not as passive recipients of charity, but as individual customers, consumers, clients, people who want to make decisions in their own lives.
Patient capital requires that we have incredible tolerance for risk, a long time horizon in terms of allowing those entrepreneurs time to experiment, to use the market as the best listening device that we have, and the expectation of below-market returns, but outsized social impact.
It recognizes that the market has its limitation, and so patient capital also works with smart subsidy to extend the benefits of a global economy to include all people.
Now, entrepreneurs need patient capital for three reasons.
First, they tend to work in markets where people make one, two, three dollars a day and they are making all of their decisions within that income level.
Second, the geographies in which they work have terrible infrastructure -- no roads to speak of, sporadic electricity and high levels of corruption.
Third, they are often creating markets.
Even if you're bringing clean water for the first time into rural villages, it is something new.
And so many low-income people have seen so many failed promises broken and seen so many quacks and sporadic medicines offered to them that building trust takes a lot of time, takes a lot of patience.
It also requires being connected to a lot of management assistance.
Not only to build the systems, the business models that allow us to reach low income people in a sustainable way, but to connect those business to other markets, to governments, to corporations -- real partnerships if we want to get to scale.
I want to share one story about an innovation called drip irrigation.
In 2002 I met this incredible entrepreneur named Amitabha Sadangi from India, who'd been working for 20 years with some of the poorest farmers on the planet.
And he was expressing his frustration that the aid market had bypassed low-income farmers altogether, despite the fact that 200 million farmers alone in India make under a dollar a day.
They were creating subsidies either for large farms, or they were giving inputs to the farmers that they thought they should use, rather than that the farmers wanted to use.
At the same time Amitabha was obsessed with this drip irrigation technology that had been invented in Israel.
It was a way of bringing small amounts of water directly to the stalk of the plant.
And it could transform swaths of desert land into fields of emerald green.
But the market also had bypassed low income farmers, because these systems were both too expensive, and they were constructed for fields that were too large.
The average small village farmer works on two acres or less.
And so, Amitabha decided that he would take that innovation and he would redesign it from the perspective of the poor farmers themselves, because he spent so many years listening to what they needed not what he thought that they should have.
And he used three fundamental principles.
The first one was miniaturization.
The drip irrigation system had to be small enough that a farmer only had to risk a quarter acre, even if he had two, because it was too frightening, given all that he had at stake.
Second, it had to be extremely affordable.
In other words, that risk on the quarter acre needed to be repaid in a single harvest, or else they wouldn't take the risk.
And third, it had to be what Amitabha calls infinitely expandable.
What I mean is with the profits from the first quarter acre, the farmers could buy a second and a third and a fourth.
As of today, IDE India, Amitabha's organization, has sold over 300,000 farmers these systems and has seen their yields and incomes double or triple on average, but this didn't happen overnight.
In fact, when you go back to the beginning, there were no private investors who would be willing to take a risk on building a new technology for a market class that made under a dollar a day, that were known to be some of the most risk-averse people on the planet and that were working in one of the riskiest sectors, agriculture.
And so we needed grants. And he used significant grants to research, to experiment, to fail, to innovate and try again.
And when he had a prototype and had a better understanding of how to market to farmers, that's when patient capital could come in.
And we helped him build a company, for profit, that would build on IDE's knowledge, and start looking at sales and exports, and be able to tap into other kinds of capital.
Secondarily, we wanted to see if we could export this drip irrigation and bring it into other countries.
And so we met Dr. Sono Khangharani in Pakistan.
And while, again, you needed patience to move a technology for the poor in India into Pakistan, just to get the permits, over time we were able to start a company with Dr. Sono, who runs a large community development organization in the Thar Desert, which is one of the remote and poorest areas of the country.
And though that company has just started, our assumption is that there too we'll see the impact on millions.
But drip irrigation isn't the only innovation.
We're starting to see these happening all around the world.
In Arusha, Tanzania, A to Z Textile Manufacturing has worked in partnership with us, with UNICEF, with the Global Fund, to create a factory that now employs 7,000 people, mostly women.
And they produce 20 million lifesaving bednets for Africans around the world.
Lifespring Hospital is a joint venture between Acumen and the government of India to bring quality, affordable maternal health care to low-income women, and it's been so successful that it's currently building a new hospital every 35 days.
And 1298 Ambulances decided that it was going to reinvent a completely broken industry, building an ambulance service in Bombay that would use the technology of Google Earth, a sliding scale pricing system so that all people could have access, and a severe and public decision not to engage in any form of corruption.
So that in the terrorist attacks of November they were the first responder, and are now beginning to scale, because of partnership.
They've just won four government contracts to build off their 100 ambulances, and are one of the largest and most effective ambulance companies in India.
This idea of scale is critical.
Because we're starting to see these enterprises reach hundreds of thousands of people. All of the ones I discussed have reached at least a quarter million people.
But that's obviously not enough.
And it's where the idea of partnership becomes so important.
Whether it's by finding those innovations that can access the capital markets, government itself, or partner with major corporations, there is unbelievable opportunity for innovation.
President Obama understands that.
He recently authorized the creation of a Social Innovation Fund to focus on what works in this country, and look at how we can scale it.
And I would submit that it's time to consider a global innovation fund that would find these entrepreneurs around the world who really have innovations, not only for their country, but ones that we can use in the developed world as well.
Invest financial assistance, but also management assistance.
And then measure the returns, both from a financial perspective and from a social impact perspective.
When we think about new approaches to aid, it's impossible not to talk about Pakistan.
We've had a rocky relationship with that country and, in all fairness, the United States has not always been a very reliable partner.
But again I would say that this is our moment for extraordinary things to happen.
And if we take that notion of a global innovation fund, we could use this time to invest not directly in government, though we would have government's blessing, nor in international experts, but in the many existing entrepreneurs and civil society leaders who already are building wonderful innovations that are reaching people all across the country.
People like Rashani Zafar, who created one of the largest microfinance banks in the country, and is a real role model for women inside and outside the country.
And Tasneem Siddiqui, who developed a way called incremental housing, where he has moved 40,000 slum dwellers into safe, affordable community housing.
Educational initiatives like DIL and The Citizen Foundation that are building schools across the country.
It's not hyperbole to say that these civil society institutions and these social entrepreneurs are building real alternatives to the Taliban.
I've invested in Pakistan for over seven years now, and those of you who've also worked there can attest that Pakistanis are an incredibly hard working population, and there is a fierce upward mobility in their very nature.
President Kennedy said that those who make peaceful revolution impossible make violent revolution inevitable.
I would say that the converse is true.
That these social leaders who really are looking at innovation and extending opportunity to the 70 percent of Pakistanis who make less than two dollars a day, provide real pathways to hope.
And as we think about how we construct aid for Pakistan, while we need to strengthen the judiciary, build greater stability, we also need to think about lifting those leaders who can be role models for the rest of the world.
On one of my last visits to Pakistan, I asked Dr. Sono if he would take me to see some of the drip irrigation in the Thar Desert.
And we left Karachi one morning before dawn.
It was about 115 degrees.
And we drove for eight hours along this moonscape-like landscape with very little color, lots of heat, very little discussion, because we were exhausted.
And finally, at the end of the journey, I could see this thin little yellow line across the horizon.
And as we got closer, its significance became apparent.
That there in the desert was a field of sunflowers growing seven feet tall.
Because one of the poorest farmers on Earth had gotten access to a technology that had allowed him to change his own life.
His name was Raja, and he had kind, twinkly hazel eyes and warm expressive hands that reminded me of my father.
And he said it was the first dry season in his entire life that he hadn't taken his 12 children and 50 grandchildren on a two day journey across the desert to work as day laborers at a commercial farm for about 50 cents a day.
Because he was building these crops.
And with the money he earned he could stay this year.
And for the first time ever in three generations, his children would go to school.
We asked him if he would send his daughters as well as his sons.
And he said, "Of course I will.
Because I don't want them discriminated against anymore."
When we think about solutions to poverty, we cannot deny individuals their fundamental dignity.
Because at the end of the day, dignity is more important to the human spirit than wealth.
And what's exciting is to see so many entrepreneurs across sectors who are building innovations that recognize that what people want is freedom and choice and opportunity.
Because that is where dignity really starts.
Martin Luther King said that love without power is anemic and sentimental, and that power without love is reckless and abusive.
Our generation has seen both approaches tried, and often fail.
But I think our generation also might be the first to have the courage to embrace both love and power.
For that is what we'll need, as we move forward to dream and imagine what it will really take to build a global economy that includes all of us, and to finally extend that fundamental proposition that all men are created equal to every human being on the planet.
The time for us to begin innovating and looking for new solutions, a cross sector, is now.
I can only talk from my own experience, but in eight years of running Acumen fund, I've seen the power of patient capital.
Not only to inspire innovation and risk taking, but to truly build systems that have created more than 25,000 jobs and delivered tens of millions of services and products to some of the poorest people on the planet.
I know it works.
But I know that many other kinds of innovation also work.
And so I urge you, in whatever sector you work, in whatever job you do, to start thinking about how we might build solutions that start from the perspective of those we're trying to help.
Rather than what we think that they might need.
It will take embracing the world with both arms.
And it will take living with the spirit of generosity and accountability, with a sense of integrity and perseverance.
And yet these are the very qualities for which men and women have been honored throughout the generations.
And there is so much good that we can do.
Just think of all those sunflowers in the desert.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Steroids: they’re infamous for their use in sports.
But they’re also found in inhalers, creams to treat poison ivy and eczema, and shots to ease inflammation.
The steroids in these medicines aren’t the same as the ones used to build muscle.
In fact, they’re all based on yet another steroid— one our body produces naturally, and we can’t live without.
Taking a step back, the reason there are so many different steroids is because the term refers to substances with a shared molecular structure, rather than shared effects on the body.
Steroids can be naturally occurring or synthetic, but what all steroids have in common is a molecular structure that consists of a base of four rings made of 17 carbon atoms arranged in three hexagons and one pentagon.
A molecule must contain this exact arrangement to be a steroid, though most also have side chains— additional atoms that can dramatically impact the molecule’s function.
Steroids get their name from the fatty molecule cholesterol.
In fact, our bodies make steroids out of cholesterol.
That fatty cholesterol base means that steroids are able to cross fatty cell membranes and enter cells.
Within the cell, they can directly influence gene expression and protein synthesis.
This is different from many other types of signaling molecules, which can’t cross the cell membrane and have to create their effects from outside the cell, through more complicated pathways.
So steroids can create their effects faster than those other molecules.
Back to the steroids in anti-inflammatory medications: all of these are based on a naturally occurring steroid called cortisol.
Cortisol is the body’s primary stress signal, and it has a huge range of functions.
When we experience a stressor— anything from a fight with a friend, to spotting a bear, to an infection or low blood sugar— the brain reacts by sending a signal from the hypothalamus to the pituitary gland.
The pituitary gland then sends a signal to the adrenal glands.
The adrenal glands produce cortisol, and release some constantly.
But when they receive the signal from the pituitary gland, they release a burst of cortisol, which spurs the body to generate more glucose for energy, decrease functions not immediately related to survival, like digestion, and can activate a fight-flight-or-freeze response.
This is helpful in the short term, but can cause undesirable side effects like insomnia and lowered mood if they last too long.
Cortisol also interacts with the immune system in complex ways— depending on the situation, it can increase or decrease certain immune functions.
In the process of fighting infection, the immune system often creates inflammation.
Cortisol suppresses the immune system’s ability to produce inflammation, which, again, can be useful in the short term.
But too much cortisol can have negative impacts, like reducing the immune system’s ability to regenerate bone marrow and lymph nodes.
To prevent levels from staying high for too long, cortisol suppresses the signal that causes the adrenal glands to release more cortisol.
Medicinal corticosteroids channel cortisol’s effects on the immune system to fight allergic reactions, rashes, and asthma.
All these things are forms of inflammation.
There are many synthetic steroids that share the same basic mechanism: they enhance the body’s cortisol supply, which in turn shuts down the hyperactive immune responses that cause inflammation.
These corticosteroids sneak into cells and can turn off the “fire alarm” by suppressing gene expression of inflammatory signals.
The steroids in inhalers and creams impact only the affected organ— the skin, or the lungs.
Intravenous or oral versions, used to treat chronic autoimmune conditions like lupus or inflammatory bowel disease, impact the whole body.
With these conditions, the body’s immune system attacks its own cells, a process analogous to a constant asthma attack or rash.
A constant low dose of steroids can help keep this renegade immune response under control— but because of the negative psychological and physiological effects of longterm exposure, higher doses are reserved for emergencies and flare-ups.
While an asthma attack, poison ivy welts, and irritable bowel syndrome might seem totally unrelated, they all have something in common: an immune response that’s doing more harm than good.
And while corticosteroids won’t give you giant muscles, they can be the body’s best defense against itself.
Do we live in a borderless world?
Before you answer that, have a look at this map.
Contemporary political map shows that we have over 200 countries in the world today.
That's probably more than at any time in centuries.
Now, many of you will object.
For you this would be a more appropriate map.
You could call it TEDistan.
In TEDistan, there are no borders, just connected spaces and unconnected spaces.
Most of you probably reside in one of the 40 dots on this screen, of the many more that represent 90 percent of the world economy.
But let's talk about the 90 percent of the world population that will never leave the place in which they were born.
For them, nations, countries, boundaries, borders still matter a great deal, and often violently.
Now here at TED, we're solving some of the great riddles of science and mysteries of the universe.
Well here is a fundamental problem we have not solved: our basic political geography.
How do we distribute ourselves around the world?
Now this is important, because border conflicts justify so much of the world's military-industrial complex.
Border conflicts can derail so much of the progress that we hope to achieve here.
So I think we need a deeper understanding of how people, money, power, religion, culture, technology interact to change the map of the world.
And we can try to anticipate those changes, and shape them in a more constructive direction.
So we're going to look at some maps of the past, the present and some maps you haven't seen in order to get a sense of where things are going.
Let's start with the world of 1945.
1945 there were just 100 countries in the world.
After World War II, Europe was devastated, but still held large overseas colonies: French West Africa, British East Africa, South Asia, and so forth.
Then over the late '40s, '50s, '60s, '70s and '80s, waves of decolonization took place.
Over 50 new countries were born.
You can see that Africa has been fragmented.
India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, South East Asian nations created.
Then came the end of the Cold War.
The end of the Cold War and the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
You had the creation of new states in Eastern Europe, the former Yugoslav republics and the Balkans, and the 'stans of central Asia.
Today we have 200 countries in the world.
The entire planet is covered by sovereign, independent nation-states.
Does that mean that someone's gain has to be someone else's loss?
Let's zoom in on one of the most strategic areas of the world, Eastern Eurasia.
As you can see on this map, Russia is still the largest country in the world.
And as you know, China is the most populous.
And they share a lengthy land border.
What you don't see on this map is that most of Russia's 150 million people are concentrated in its western provinces and areas that are close to Europe.
And only 30 million people are in its eastern areas.
In fact, the World Bank predicts that Russia's population is declining towards about 120 million people And there is another thing that you don't see on this map.
Stalin, Khrushchev and other Soviet leaders forced Russians out to the far east to be in gulags, labor camps, nuclear cities, whatever the case was.
But as oil prices rose, Russian governments have invested in infrastructure to unite the country, east and west.
But nothing has more perversely impacted Russia's demographic distribution, because the people in the east, who never wanted to be there anyway, have gotten on those trains and roads and gone back to the west.
As a result, in the Russian far east today, which is twice the size of India, you have exactly six million Russians.
So let's get a sense of what is happening in this part of the world.
We can start with Mongolia, or as some call it, Mine-golia.
Why do they call it that?
Because in Mine-golia, Chinese firms operate and own most of the mines -- copper, zinc, gold -- and they truck the resources south and east into mainland China.
China isn't conquering Mongolia.
It's buying it.
Colonies were once conquered. Today countries are bought.
So let's apply this principle to Siberia.
Siberia most of you probably think of as a cold, desolate, unlivable place.
But in fact, with global warming and rising temperatures, all of a sudden you have vast wheat fields and agribusiness, and grain being produced in Siberia.
But who is it going to feed?
Well, just on the other side of the Amo River, in the Heilongjiang and Harbin provinces of China, you have over 100 million people.
That's larger than the entire population of Russia.
Every single year, for at least a decade or more, [60,000] of them have been voting with their feet, crossing, moving north and inhabiting this desolate terrain.
They set up their own bazaars and medical clinics.
They've taken over the timber industry and been shipping the lumber east, back into China.
Again, like Mongolia, China isn't conquering Russia. It's just leasing it.
That's what I call globalization Chinese style.
Now maybe this is what the map of the region might look like in 10 to 20 years.
But hold on. This map is 700 years old.
This is the map of the Yuan Dynasty, led by Kublai Khan, the grandson of Genghis Khan.
So history doesn't necessarily repeat itself, but it does rhyme.
This is just to give you a taste of what's happening in this part of the world.
Again, globalization Chinese style.
Because globalization opens up all kinds of ways for us to undermine and change the way we think about political geography.
So, the history of East Asia in fact, people don't think about nations and borders.
They think more in terms of empires and hierarchies, usually Chinese or Japanese.
Well it's China's turn again.
So let's look at how China is re-establishing that hierarchy in the far East.
It starts with the global hubs.
Remember the 40 dots on the nighttime map that show the hubs of the global economy?
East Asia today has more of those global hubs than any other region in the world.
Tokyo, Seoul, Beijing, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Singapore and Sidney.
These are the filters and funnels of global capital.
Trillions of dollars a year are being brought into the region, so much of it being invested into China.
Then there is trade.
These vectors and arrows represent ever stronger trade relationships that China has with every country in the region.
Specifically, it targets Japan and Korea and Australia, countries that are strong allies of the United States.
Australia, for example, is heavily dependent on exporting iron ore and natural gas to China.
For poorer countries, China reduces tariffs so that Laos and Cambodia can sell their goods more cheaply and become dependent on exporting to China as well.
And now many of you have been reading in the news how people are looking to China to lead the rebound, the economic rebound, not just in Asia, but potentially for the world.
The Asian free trade zone, almost free trade zone, that's emerging now has a greater trade volume than trade across the Pacific.
So China is becoming the anchor of the economy in the region.
Another pillar of this strategy is diplomacy.
China has signed military agreements with many countries in the region.
It has become the hub of diplomatic institutions such as the East Asian Community.
Some of these organizations don't even have the United States as a member.
There is a treaty of nonaggression between countries, such that if there were a conflict between China and the United States, most countries vow to just sit it out, including American allies like Korea and Australia.
Another pillar of the strategy, like Russia, is demographic.
China exports business people, nannies, students, teachers to teach Chinese around the region, to intermarry and to occupy ever greater commanding heights of the economies.
Already ethnic Chinese people in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia are the real key factors and drivers in the economies there.
Chinese pride is resurgent in the region as a result.
Singapore, for example, used to ban Chinese language education.
Now it encourages it.
If you add it all up what do you get?
Well, if you remember before World War II, Japan had a vision for a greater Japanese co-prosperity sphere.
What's emerging today is what you might call a greater Chinese co-prosperity sphere.
So no matter what the lines on the map tell you in terms of nations and borders, what you really have emerging in the far east are national cultures, but in a much more fluid, imperial zone.
All of this is happening without firing a shot.
That's most certainly not the case in the Middle East where countries are still very uncomfortable in the borders left behind by European colonialists.
So what can we do to think about borders differently in this part of the world?
What lines on the map should we focus on?
What I want to present to you is what I call state building, day by day.
Let's start with Iraq.
Six years after the U.S. invasion of Iraq, the country still exists more on a map than it does in reality.
Oil used to be one of the forces holding Iraq together; now it is the most significant cause of the country's disintegration.
The reason is Kurdistan.
The Kurds for 3,000 years have been waging a struggle for independence, and now is their chance to finally have it.
These are pipeline routes, which emerge from Kurdistan, which is an oil-rich region.
And today, if you go to Kurdistan, you'll see that Kurdish Peshmerga guerillas are squaring off against the Sunni Iraqi army.
But what are they guarding?
Is it really a border on the map?
No. It's the pipelines.
If the Kurds can control their pipelines, they can set the terms of their own statehood.
Now should we be upset about this, about the potential disintegration of Iraq?
I don't believe we should.
Iraq will still be the second largest oil producer in the world, behind Saudi Arabia.
And we'll have a chance to solve a 3,000 year old dispute.
Now remember Kurdistan is landlocked.
It has no choice but to behave.
In order to profit from its oil it has to export it through Turkey or Syria, and other countries, and Iraq itself.
And therefore it has to have amicable relations with them.
Now lets look at a perennial conflict in the region.
That is, of course, in Palestine.
Palestine is something of a cartographic anomaly because it's two parts Palestinian, one part Israel.
30 years of rose garden diplomacy have not delivered us peace in this conflict.
What might? I believe that what might solve the problem is infrastructure.
Today donors are spending billions of dollars on this.
These two arrows are an arc, an arc of commuter railroads and other infrastructure that link the West Bank and Gaza.
If Gaza can have a functioning port and be linked to the West Bank, you can have a viable Palestinian state, Palestinian economy.
That, I believe, is going to bring peace to this particular conflict.
The lesson from Kurdistan and from Palestine is that independence alone, without infrastructure, is futile.
Now what might this entire region look like if in fact we focus on other lines on the map besides borders, when the insecurities might abate?
The last time that was the case was actually a century ago, during the Ottoman Empire.
This is the Hejaz Railway.
The Hejaz Railway ran from Istanbul to Medina via Damascus.
It even had an offshoot running to Haifa in what is today Israel, on the Mediterranean Sea.
But today the Hejaz Railway lies in tatters, ruins.
If we were to focus on reconstructing these curvy lines on the map, infrastructure, that cross the straight lines, the borders, I believe the Middle East would be a far more peaceful region.
Now let's look at another part of the world, the former Soviet Republics of Central Asia, the 'stans.
These countries' borders originate from Stalin's decrees.
He purposely did not want these countries to make sense.
He wanted ethnicities to mingle in ways that would allow him to divide and rule.
Fortunately for them, most of their oil and gas resources were discovered after the Soviet Union collapsed.
Now I know some of you may be thinking, "Oil, oil, oil.
Why is it all he's talking about is oil?"
Well, there is a big difference in the way we used to talk about oil and the way we're talking about it now.
Before it was, how do we control their oil?
Now it's their oil for their own purposes.
And I assure you it's every bit as important to them as it might have been to colonizers and imperialists.
Here are just some of the pipeline projections and possibilities and scenarios and routes that are being mapped out for the next several decades.
A great deal of them.
For a number of countries in this part of the world, having pipelines is the ticket to becoming part of the global economy and for having some meaning besides the borders that they are not loyal to themselves.
Just take Azerbaijan.
Azerbaijan was a forgotten corner of the Caucuses, but now with the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline into Turkey, it has rebranded itself as the frontier of the west.
Then there is Turkmenistan, which most people think of as a frozen basket case.
But now it's contributing gas across the Caspian Sea to provide for Europe, and even a potentially Turkmen- Afghan-Pakistan-India pipeline as well.
Then there is Kazakhstan, which didn't even have a name before.
It was more considered South Siberia during the Soviet Union.
Today most people recognize Kazakhstan as an emerging geopolitical player. Why?
Because it has shrewdly designed pipelines to flow across the Caspian, north through Russia, and even east to China.
More pipelines means more silk roads, instead of the Great Game.
The Great Game connotes dominance of one over the other.
Silk road connotes independence and mutual trust.
The more pipelines we have, the more silk roads we'll have, and the less of a dominant Great Game competition we'll have in the 21st century.
Now let's look at the only part of the world that really has brought down its borders, and how that has enhanced its strength.
And that is, of course, Europe.
The European Union began as just the coal and steel community of six countries, and their main purpose was really to keep the rehabilitation of Germany to happen in a peaceful way.
But then eventually it grew into 12 countries, and those are the 12 stars on the European flag.
The E.U. also became a currency block, and is now the most powerful trade block in the entire world.
On average, the E.U. has grown by one country per year since the end of the Cold War.
In fact most of that happened on just one day.
In 2004, 15 new countries joined the E.U.
and now you have what most people consider a zone of peace spanning 27 countries and 450 million people.
So what is next? What is the future of the European Union?
Well in light blue, you see the zones or the regions that are at least two-thirds or more dependent on the European Union for trade and investment.
What does that tell us? Trade and investment tell us that Europe is putting its money where its mouth is.
Even if these regions aren't part of the E.U., they are becoming part of its sphere of influence.
Just take the Balkans. Croatia, Serbia Bosnia, they're not members of the E.U. yet.
But you can get on a German ICE train and make it almost to Albania.
In Bosnia you use the Euro currency already, and that's the only currency they're probably ever going to have.
So, looking at other parts of Europe's periphery, such as North Africa.
On average, every year or two, a new oil or gas pipeline opens up under the Mediterranean, connecting North Africa to Europe.
That not only helps Europe diminish its reliance on Russia for energy, but if you travel to North Africa today, you'll hear more and more people saying that they don't really think of their region as the Middle East.
So in other words, I believe that President Sarkozy of France is right when he talks about a Mediterranean union.
Now let's look at Turkey and the Caucasus.
I mentioned Azerbaijan before.
That corridor of Turkey and the Caucasus has become the conduit for 20 percent of Europe's energy supply.
So does Turkey really have to be a member of the European Union?
I don't think it does. I think it's already part of a Euro-Turkish superpower.
So what's next? Where are we going to see borders change and new countries born?
Well, South Central Asia, South West Asia is a very good place to start.
Eight years after the U.S. invaded Afghanistan there is still a tremendous amount of instability.
Pakistan and Afghanistan are still so fragile that neither of them have dealt constructively with the problem of Pashtun nationalism.
This is the flag that flies in the minds of 20 million Pashtuns who live on both sides of the Afghan and Pakistan border.
Let's not neglect the insurgency just to the south, Balochistan. Two weeks ago, Balochi rebels attacked a Pakistani military garrison, and this was the flag that they raised over it.
The post-colonial entropy that is happening around the world is accelerating, and I expect more such changes to occur in the map as the states fragment.
Of course, we can't forget Africa.
53 countries, and by far the most number of suspiciously straight lines on the map.
If we were to look at all of Africa we could most certainly acknowledge far more, tribal divisions and so forth.
But let's just look at Sudan, the second-largest country in Africa.
It has three ongoing civil wars, the genocide in Darfur, which you all know about, the civil war in the east of the country, and south Sudan.
South Sudan is going to be having a referendum in 2011 in which it is very likely to vote itself independence.
Now let's go up to the Arctic Circle.
There is a great race on for energy resources under the Arctic seabed.
Who will win? Canada? Russia? The United States?
Actually Greenland.
Several weeks ago Greenland's [60,000] people voted themselves self-governance rights from Denmark.
So Denmark is about to get a whole lot smaller.
What is the lesson from all of this?
Geopolitics is a very unsentimental discipline.
It's constantly morphing and changing the world, like climate change.
And like our relationship with the ecosystem we're always searching for equilibrium in how we divide ourselves across the planet.
Now we fear changes on the map.
We fear civil wars, death tolls, having to learn the names of new countries.
But I believe that the inertia of the existing borders that we have today is far worse and far more violent.
The question is how do we change those borders, and what lines do we focus on?
I believe we focus on the lines that cross borders, the infrastructure lines.
Then we'll wind up with the world we want, a borderless one.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hi! Hi!
I am forty-five years old.
I know I look amazing, thank you. (Laughter) I am forty-five years old and I have never once unselfconsciously held hands with a lover in public.
I am forty-five years old and I have never once casually, comfortably, carelessly held hands with a partner in public.
I don't know how many of you can even imagine what that might be like because, of course, it's a small thing, isn't it, holding hands with a lover in public?
And it's not that nobody wanted to, it's just that we didn't feel comfortable.
Now, like many gay people, when I was younger, in my young life, I struggled at one time against being gay.
I didn't want to be different.
I didn't want to be this thing that I didn't really understand.
This thing that I had learned was shameful or jokeworthy.
But when I eventually did sort of understand and come to accept who and what I am, I have never since that moment, never once, have I ever wished that it turned out differently!
I am thoroughly, deeply, delightedly, happy to be gay!
(Applause) It suits me! (Laughter) I am really good at it! (Laughter) And yet, everyday I am jealous of straight people, because that private, little, small, intimate gesture of affection has never once been mine.
Everyday I see young, straight couples walking through the park and they are casually holding hands and I am jealous of them!
I see a teenage couple at a bus stop and she is leaning into him, and her hand is in his, and both of their hands are tucked into his jacket pocket for warmth, and I am jealous of that teenage couple!
I will sometimes see a man who unconsciously put his hand, a protective arm, around his girlfriend and she'll link her fingers through his, and I am jealous of that!
Maybe you're on Grafton Street and you see an older lady and she gestures to draw her husband's attention to something in the window, and without even thinking he just takes her hand and they stand there peering into the window discussing whatever it is that drew their attention and their hands are just carelessly joined together, and I am jealous of that!
Because gay people do not get to hold hands in public without first considering the risk.
Gay people do not get to put an arm through another arm or put a hand on a boyfriend's waist without first considering what the possible consequences might be.
We look around to see: where are we, who's around, is it late at night? What kind of area is it?
Are there bored teenagers hanging around looking for amusement?
Are there bunches of lads standing outside a pub?
And if we decided OK, maybe it is, it's OK, well then we do hold hands, but the thing is that now those hands are not casual and thoughtless.
They are now considered and weighed.
But we stroll on hand in hand trying to be just normal and carefree just like everybody else, but actually we're not!
Because we are constantly scanning the pavement ahead, just in case.
And then even if we do see, you know, a group of blokes coming towards us, maybe we will decide sort of silently to continue holding hands, defiantly!
But now our small, intimate gesture between two people in love is no longer a small, intimate gesture.
It is a political act of defiance, and it has been ruined.
And anyway then you sort of think: "Well, we've had such a lovely afternoon poking around in that garden center looking at things for the garden we don't actually have."
(Laughter) And then you think, all it will take is one spat "faggots" or a split lip to turn that really lovely afternoon into a bad afternoon that you will never want to remember.
And even if you are somewhere where you think: "Ah, it's perfectly fine here.
Nobody here is going to react badly to our tiny gesture."
You know, I don't know, say you're wandering through a posh department store.
Even then people will notice.
Now, they may only notice because they're thinking: "Isn't nice to see two gays holding hands in public?"
But they still notice, and I don't want them to notice because then our small, intimate, private, little, human gesture has been turned into a statement, and I don't want that!
Our little, private, gesture, like Schrödinger's cat, is altered simply by being observed.
We live in this sort of homophobic world, and you might think that a small, little thing like holding hands in public, "Well, it's just a small thing," and you're right!
It is indeed just a small thing.
But it is one of many small things that make us human, and there are lots of small things everyday that LGBT people have to put up with, that other people don't have to put up with.
Lots of small things that we have to put up with in order to be safe or not to be the object of ridicule or scorn.
And we are expected to put up with those things and just thank our blessings that we don't live in a country where we could be imprisoned or executed for being gay.
And we are so used to making those small adjustments everyday, that even now we rarely ourselves even notice that we are doing it, because it is just part of the background of our lives.
This constant malign presence that we have assimilated, and if we complain about it, we are told we have nothing to complain about because: "Aren't you lucky that you don't live in Uganda?"
And yes, I am lucky that I don't live in Uganda, but that's not good enough!
This isn't some sort of game or competition where the person who has it the worst wins the right to complain and everybody else has to just put up or shut up.
Our society is homophobic!
It is infused with homophobia.
It is dripping with homophobia.
And when you are forty-five years old and you have spent thirty years putting up, thirty years absorbing all of those small slights and intimidations and sneers and occasionally much worse, you just get tired of it.
You get fed up putting up.
I am fed up of reading yet another article by yet another straight person explaining why I am less somehow than everybody else.
You get fed up listening to people describe you as intrinsically disordered, people who don't even know you, from their celibate pulpits.
You get fed up of the scrawled graffiti, and you get fed up of people sneeringly describe things as gay.
You get fed up of steeling yourself to pass by the Saturday night drunks hoping that they won't notice you, and you get fed up of people using their time and energies and talents to campaign against you being treated just like every other citizen.
(Applause) I'm forty-five and I'm fed up putting up.
Now I would, of course, prefer if nobody harbored any animosity towards gay people or any discomfort with gay relationships, but, you know, I can live with the kind of small, personal, private homophobia that some people might have.
For example, I can live with Mary in Wicklow who sometimes turns on the television and sees Graham Norton and thinks, "Oh, he seems nice enough but does he have to be so gay?"
(Laughter) I can live with that.
I can live with Mary who doesn't know any gay people, apart from that fella who does her hair once a month in "Curl Up and Dye".
(Laughter) Mary, whose only knowledge of gay people and our relationships comes from what she has gleaned from schoolyards, church and Coronation Street.
I can live with that.
I would be happy to sit down on the sofa and watch Coronation Street with Mary.
I would be happy to have a cup of tea with her and discuss with her why she feels a little uncomfortable with gay relationships and I would hope that Mary would change her mind.
I would hope that she would meet more gay people and find out pretty quickly that we are just as ordinary, just as nice or just as annoying as all of you people are.
And I would hope that she would change her mind for her own sake as much as anybody else's, because gay people are just as capable of bringing goodness into Mary's life as anybody else.
And, of course, we could help her with the decorating!
(Laughter) But that kind of personal discomfort with gay people and their relationships is entirely different from the kind of homophobia that manifests itself in public.
The kind of homophobia that manifests itself in an attempt to have LGBT people treated differently or less than everybody else.
The kind of homophobia that seeks to characterize gay people and their relationships as less worthy of respect.
That kind of homophobia I do have a problem with, and I think gay people should be allowed to call it when they see it, because it is our right to do so!
Of course, many people object to the word homophobia itself.
They object to the "phobia" part.
'I'm not afraid of you," they say.
(Laughter) But I'm not saying that homophobes cower in fear every time they pass a Cher album, (Laughter) but they are afraid.
They are afraid of what the world will look like when it treats gay, lesbian and bisexual people with the same respect as everybody else.
They are afraid that they won't fit in this brave new world of equality.
But, of course, their fear is irrational because, of course, the world will not look any different.
Kids will still want to eat ice cream, dogs will still play fetch, the tide will still come in, and parallel parking will still be difficult.
(Laughter) The most vocal homophobes who know that they long ago lost the arguments around the decriminalization of homosexual sex or every other advance for gay people since.
These days you will find those very vocal homophobes clustered around the same-sex marriage debate -- and it is quite the spectacle because, of course, they know that they can't just come right out and bluntly say what drives them, which is an animus towards gay people, and a disgust at what they imagine we do in bed, because they know that that won't wash with the general public anymore.
So they are forced to sort of scramble for any other reason that they can think of to argue their case.
So, gay people are going to destroy the institution of marriage, gay couples will be wandering through orphanages picking babies off shelves trying to find one that matches their new IKEA sofa.
(Laughter) Or that allowing gay people to get married will destroy society itself, and many, many more including my own personal favorite, which is the old argument that the word "marriage" is defined in some dictionary as a union between a man and a woman, and that therefore same-sex marriage can't possibly be a "marriage".
Which is a piffling argument against words and dictionaries and not an argument against same-sex marriage.
(Applause) Now, of course, the other real driver of homophobia, and you can all clutch your pearls here because I am going to go here, is a disgust with gay sex, in particular with gay male sex.
The poor old lesbians just get caught in the homophobic crossfire. (Laughter) You know guilty by association.
Because what they really don't like is anal sex, sodomy, you know, buggery, and they assume that that is all we do.
They feverishly imagine that we spend all day jumping around buggering each other.
I mean they obsess on it, and, in fact, what they actually do, is reduce us down to this one sex act, whether or not we do it at all, because we are not regular people with the same hopes and aspirations and ambitions and feelings as everyone else, we are simply walking sex acts.
Earlier this year I was invited to take part in the St. Pat's for All parade in Queens, New York.
Now it is a really lovely, charming, grassroots event in Queens which was set up in response to the ban on gay groups marching in the famous Manhattan St. Patrick's Day Parade.
In that Manhattan St. Patrick's Day Parade any Irish group who wants can march, Irish policemen can march, Irish firemen, Irish footballers, Irish community groups, Irish volleyball teams, Irish book clubs.
Any Irish people who want to have a good shot at being allowed to march in that parade -- except for Irish gays, because, as far as the organizers of that parade are concerned, gays are nothing more than walking sex acts, and there is no place for buggery in their parade.
Now, I actually saw a small documentary once about one of the leaders of the organizers of that parade, they are the Ancient Order of Hibernians, and they're like a Catholic Orange Order (Laughter) -- they dress the same and everything -- (Laughter) and in the documentary, you know, he was a nice old fellow, and he had this lovely wife, and they seemed very happy together.
And when I looked at them, I saw this life lived together, and I imagined if I asked him about their life together, that he would remember the first time they met, he would remember how nervous he was on their first date together, and how proud he was when he turned and saw her coming up the aisle in that dress that she had fretted over for so long.
And I imagine that if I asked him, he would remember that phone call to say that she had gone into labor and the dash across town, and the other time when she went so far past her due date that she promised she would bounce up and down on a trampoline until the baby bounced out of her and how they laughed so hard about that.
And I imagine he would remember other occasions like when their youngest broke his arm and cried all the way to the hospital, and that other time when she was sick and he could not sleep alone in the empty bed and so in the middle of the night he got up and went back to the hospital even though he knew they wouldn't let him in to see her at that hour.
I imagine that he would remember all of those things and many more.
All of the small things that go up to making a relationship and making a person a person.
And when I looked at him, I imagined all of those things too.
But when he looks at me he doesn't see me that way.
He doesn't see gay people that way.
To him we are just sex acts and there is no place for sex acts in his parade.
I am forty-five years old and I am fed up putting up.
So, I'm not anymore.
I'm forty-five years old and I am not putting up anymore because I don't have the energy anymore.
Putting up is exhausting!
I am forty-five years old and I'm not putting up anymore because I don't have the patience anymore.
Forty-five years old! I was born six months before the Stonewall riots, and you have had forty-five years to work out, that despite appearances, I am just as ordinary, just as unremarkable, and just as human as you are!
I'm forty-five years old and I am not asking anymore I am just being -- human being!
Thank you for your time!
(Applause) Thank you! Thank you!
(Applause)
I'd like to talk a little bit this morning about what happens if we move from design to design thinking.
Now this rather old photo up there is actually the first project I was ever hired to do, something like 25 years ago.
It's a woodworking machine, or at least a piece of one, and my task was to make this thing a little bit more modern, a little bit easier to use.
I thought, at the time, I did a pretty good job.
Unfortunately, not very long afterwards the company went out of business.
This is the second project that I did. It's a fax machine.
I put an attractive shell around some new technology.
Again, 18 months later, the product was obsolete.
And now, of course, the whole technology is obsolete.
Now, I'm a fairly slow learner, but eventually it occurred to me that maybe what passed for design wasn't all that important -- making things more attractive, making them a bit easier to use, making them more marketable.
By focusing on a design, maybe just a single product, I was being incremental and not having much of an impact.
But I think this small view of design is a relatively recent phenomenon, and in fact really emerged in the latter half of the 20th century as design became a tool of consumerism.
So when we talk about design today, and particularly when we read about it in the popular press, we're often talking about products like these.
Amusing? Yes. Desirable? Maybe.
Important? Not so very.
But this wasn't always the way.
And I'd like to suggest that if we take a different view of design, and focus less on the object and more on design thinking as an approach, that we actually might see the result in a bigger impact.
Now this gentleman, Isambard Kingdom Brunel, designed many great things in his career in the 19th century, including the Clifton suspension bridge in Bristol and the Thames tunnel at Rotherhithe.
Both great designs and actually very innovative too.
His greatest creation runs actually right through here in Oxford.
It's called the Great Western Railway.
And as a kid I grew up very close to here, and one of my favorite things to do was to cycle along by the side of the railway waiting for the great big express trains to roar past.
You can see it represented here in J.M.W. Turner's painting, "Rain, Steam and Speed".
Now, what Brunel said that he wanted to achieve for his passengers was the experience of floating across the countryside.
Now, this was back in the 19th century.
And to do that meant creating the flattest gradients that had ever yet been made, which meant building long viaducts across river valleys -- this is actually the viaduct across the Thames at Maidenhead -- and long tunnels such as the one at Box, in Wiltshire.
But he didn't stop there. He didn't stop with just trying to design the best railway journey.
He imagined an integrated transportation system in which it would be possible for a passenger to embark on a train in London and disembark from a ship in New York.
One journey from London to New York.
This is the S.S. Great Western that he built to take care of the second half of that journey.
Now, Brunel was working 100 years before the emergence of the design profession, but I think he was using design thinking to solve problems and to create world-changing innovations.
Now, design thinking begins with what Roger Martin, the business school professor at the University of Toronto, calls integrative thinking.
And that's the ability to exploit opposing ideas and opposing constraints to create new solutions.
In the case of design, that means balancing desirability, what humans need, with technical feasibility, and economic viability.
With innovations like the Great Western, we can stretch that balance to the absolute limit.
So somehow, we went from this to this.
Systems thinkers who were reinventing the world, to a priesthood of folks in black turtlenecks and designer glasses working on small things.
As our industrial society matured, so design became a profession and it focused on an ever smaller canvas until it came to stand for aesthetics, image and fashion.
Now I'm not trying to throw stones here.
I'm a fully paid-up member of that priesthood, and somewhere in here I have my designer glasses.
There we go.
But I do think that perhaps design is getting big again.
And that's happening through the application of design thinking to new kinds of problems -- to global warming, to education, healthcare, security, clean water, whatever.
And as we see this reemergence of design thinking and we see it beginning to tackle new kinds of problems, there are some basic ideas that I think we can observe that are useful.
And I'd like to talk about some of those just for the next few minutes.
The first of those is that design is human-centered.
It may integrate technology and economics, but it starts with what humans need, or might need.
What makes life easier, more enjoyable?
What makes technology useful and usable?
But that is more than simply good ergonomics, putting the buttons in the right place.
It's often about understanding culture and context before we even know where to start to have ideas.
So when a team was working on a new vision screening program in India, they wanted to understand what the aspirations and motivations were of these school children to understand how they might play a role in screening their parents.
Conversion Sound has developed a high quality, ultra-low-cost digital hearing aid for the developing world.
Now, in the West we rely on highly trained technicians to fit these hearing aids.
In places like India, those technicians simply don't exist.
So it took a team working in India with patients and community health workers to understand how a PDA and an application on a PDA might replace those technicians in a fitting and diagnostic service.
Instead of starting with technology, the team started with people and culture.
So if human need is the place to start, then design thinking rapidly moves on to learning by making.
Instead of thinking about what to build, building in order to think.
Now, prototypes speed up the process of innovation, because it is only when we put our ideas out into the world that we really start to understand their strengths and weaknesses.
And the faster we do that, the faster our ideas evolve.
Now, much has been said and written about the Aravind Eye Institute in Madurai, India.
They do an incredible job of serving very poor patients by taking the revenues from those who can afford to pay to cross-subsidize those who cannot.
Now, they are very efficient, but they are also very innovative.
When I visited them a few years ago, what really impressed me was their willingness to prototype their ideas very early.
This is the manufacturing facility for one of their biggest cost breakthroughs.
They make their own intraocular lenses.
These are the lenses that replace those that are damaged by cataracts.
And I think it's partly their prototyping mentality that really allowed them to achieve the breakthrough.
Because they brought the cost down from $200 a pair, down to just $4 a pair.
Partly they did this by instead of building a fancy new factory, they used the basement of one of their hospitals.
And instead of installing the large-scale machines used by western producers, they used low-cost CAD/CAM prototyping technology.
They are now the biggest manufacturer of these lenses in the developing world and have recently moved into a custom factory.
So if human need is the place to start, and prototyping, a vehicle for progress, then there are also some questions to ask about the destination.
Instead of seeing its primary objective as consumption, design thinking is beginning to explore the potential of participation -- the shift from a passive relationship between consumer and producer to the active engagement of everyone in experiences that are meaningful, productive and profitable.
So I'd like to take the idea that Rory Sutherland talked about, this notion that intangible things are worth perhaps more than physical things, and take that a little bit further and say that I think the design of participatory systems, in which many more forms of value beyond simply cash are both created and measured, is going to be the major theme, not only for design, but also for our economy as we go forward.
So William Beveridge, when he wrote the first of his famous reports in 1942, created what became Britain's welfare state in which he hoped that every citizen would be an active participant in their own social well-being.
By the time he wrote his third report, he confessed that he had failed and instead had created a society of welfare consumers.
Hilary Cottam, Charlie Leadbeater, and Hugo Manassei of Participle have taken this idea of participation, and in their manifesto entitled Beveridge 4.0, they are suggesting a framework for reinventing the welfare state.
So in one of their projects called Southwark Circle, they worked with residents in Southwark, South London and a small team of designers to develop a new membership organization to help the elderly with household tasks.
Designs were refined and developed with 150 older people and their families before the service was launched earlier this year.
We can take this idea of participation perhaps to its logical conclusion and say that design may have its greatest impact when it's taken out of the hands of designers and put into the hands of everyone.
Nurses and practitioners at U.S. healthcare system Kaiser Permanente study the topic of improving the patient experience, and particularly focused on the way that they exchange knowledge and change shift.
Through a program of observational research, brainstorming new solutions and rapid prototyping, they've developed a completely new way to change shift.
They went from retreating to the nurse's station to discuss the various states and needs of patients, to developing a system that happened on the ward in front of patients, using a simple software tool.
By doing this they brought the time that they were away from patients down from 40 minutes to 12 minutes, on average.
They increased patient confidence and nurse happiness.
When you multiply that by all the nurses in all the wards in 40 hospitals in the system, it resulted, actually, in a pretty big impact.
And this is just one of thousands of opportunities in healthcare alone.
So these are just some of the kind of basic ideas around design thinking and some of the new kinds of projects that they're being applied to.
But I'd like to go back to Brunel here, and suggest a connection that might explain why this is happening now, and maybe why design thinking is a useful tool.
And that connection is change.
In times of change we need new alternatives, new ideas.
Now, Brunel worked at the height of the Industrial Revolution, when all of life and our economy was being reinvented.
Now the industrial systems of Brunel's time have run their course, and indeed they are part of the problem today.
But, again, we are in the midst of massive change.
And that change is forcing us to question quite fundamental aspects of our society -- how we keep ourselves healthy, how we govern ourselves, how we educate ourselves, how we keep ourselves secure.
And in these times of change, we need these new choices because our existing solutions are simply becoming obsolete.
So why design thinking?
Because it gives us a new way of tackling problems.
Instead of defaulting to our normal convergent approach where we make the best choice out of available alternatives, it encourages us to take a divergent approach, to explore new alternatives, new solutions, new ideas that have not existed before.
But before we go through that process of divergence, there is actually quite an important first step.
And that is, what is the question that we're trying to answer?
What's the design brief?
Now Brunel may have asked a question like this, "How do I take a train from London to New York?"
But what are the kinds of questions that we might ask today?
So these are some that we've been asked to think about recently.
And one in particular, is one that we're working on with the Acumen Fund, in a project that's been funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
How might we improve access to safe drinking water for the world's poorest people, and at the same time stimulate innovation amongst local water providers?
So instead of having a bunch of American designers come up with new ideas that may or may not have been appropriate, we took a sort of more open, collaborative and participative approach.
We teamed designers and investment experts up with 11 water organizations across India.
And through workshops they developed innovative new products, services, and business models.
We hosted a competition and then funded five of those organizations to develop their ideas.
So they developed and iterated these ideas.
And then IDEO and Acumen spent several weeks working with them to help design new social marketing campaigns, community outreach strategies, business models, new water vessels for storing water and carts for delivering water.
Some of those ideas are just getting launched into the market.
And the same process is just getting underway with NGOs in East Africa.
So for me, this project shows kind of how far we can go from some of those sort of small things that I was working on at the beginning of my career.
That by focusing on the needs of humans and by using prototypes to move ideas along quickly, by getting the process out of the hands of designers, and by getting the active participation of the community, we can tackle bigger and more interesting questions.
And just like Brunel, by focusing on systems, we can have a bigger impact.
So that's one thing that we've been working on.
I'm actually really quite interested, and perhaps more interested to know what this community thinks we could work on.
What kinds of questions do we think design thinking could be used to tackle?
And if you've got any ideas then feel free, you can post them to Twitter.
There is a hash tag there that you can use, #CBDQ.
And the list looked something like this a little while ago.
And of course you can search to find the questions that you're interested in by using the same hash code.
So I'd like to believe that design thinking actually can make a difference, that it can help create new ideas and new innovations, beyond the latest High Street products.
To do that I think we have to take a more expansive view of design, more like Brunel, less a domain of a professional priesthood.
And the first step is to start asking the right questions.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
For years I've been feeling frustrated, because as a religious historian, I've become acutely aware of the centrality of compassion in all the major world faiths.
Every single one of them has evolved their own version of what's been called the Golden Rule.
Sometimes it comes in a positive version -- "Always treat all others as you'd like to be treated yourself."
And equally important is the negative version -- "Don't do to others what you would not like them to do to you."
Look into your own heart, discover what it is that gives you pain and then refuse, under any circumstance whatsoever, to inflict that pain on anybody else.
And people have emphasized the importance of compassion, not just because it sounds good, but because it works.
People have found that when they have implemented the Golden Rule as Confucius said, "all day and every day," not just a question of doing your good deed for the day and then returning to a life of greed and egotism, but to do it all day and every day, you dethrone yourself from the center of your world, put another there, and you transcend yourself.
And it brings you into the presence of what's been called God, Nirvana, Rama, Tao.
Something that goes beyond what we know in our ego-bound existence.
But you know you'd never know it a lot of the time, that this was so central to the religious life.
Because with a few wonderful exceptions, very often when religious people come together, religious leaders come together, they're arguing about abstruse doctrines or uttering a council of hatred or inveighing against homosexuality or something of that sort.
Often people don't really want to be compassionate.
I sometimes see when I'm speaking to a congregation of religious people a sort of mutinous expression crossing their faces because people often want to be right instead.
And that of course defeats the object of the exercise.
Now why was I so grateful to TED?
Because they took me very gently from my book-lined study and brought me into the 21st century, enabling me to speak to a much, much wider audience than I could have ever conceived.
Because I feel an urgency about this.
If we don't manage to implement the Golden Rule globally, so that we treat all peoples, wherever and whoever they may be, as though they were as important as ourselves, I doubt that we'll have a viable world to hand on to the next generation.
The task of our time, one of the great tasks of our time, is to build a global society, as I said, where people can live together in peace.
And the religions that should be making a major contribution are instead seen as part of the problem.
And of course it's not just religious people who believe in the Golden Rule.
This is the source of all morality, this imaginative act of empathy, putting yourself in the place of another.
And so we have a choice, it seems to me.
We can either go on bringing out or emphasizing the dogmatic and intolerant aspects of our faith, or we can go back to the rabbis. Rabbi Hillel, the older contemporary of Jesus, who, when asked by a pagan to sum up the whole of Jewish teaching while he stood on one leg, said, "That which is hateful to you, do not do to your neighbor.
That is the Torah and everything else is only commentary."
And the rabbis and the early fathers of the church who said that any interpretation of scripture that bred hatred and disdain was illegitimate.
And we need to revive that spirit.
And it's not just going to happen because a spirit of love wafts us down.
We have to make this happen, and we can do it with the modern communications that TED has introduced.
Already I've been tremendously heartened at the response of all our partners.
In Singapore, we have a group going to use the Charter to heal divisions recently that have sprung up in Singaporean society, and some members of the parliament want to implement it politically.
In Malaysia, there is going to be an art exhibition in which leading artists are going to be taking people, young people, and showing them that compassion also lies at the root of all art.
Throughout Europe, the Muslim communities are holding events and discussions, are discussing the centrality of compassion in Islam and in all faiths.
But it can't stop there. It can't stop with the launch.
Religious teaching, this is where we've gone so wrong, concentrating solely on believing abstruse doctrines.
Religious teaching must always lead to action.
And I intend to work on this till my dying day.
And I want to continue with our partners to do two things -- educate and stimulate compassionate thinking.
Education because we've so dropped out of compassion.
People often think it simply means feeling sorry for somebody.
But of course you don't understand compassion if you're just going to think about it.
You also have to do it.
I want them to get the media involved because the media are crucial in helping to dissolve some of the stereotypical views we have of other people, which are dividing us from one another.
The same applies to educators.
I'd like youth to get a sense of the dynamism, the dynamic and challenge of a compassionate lifestyle.
And also see that it demands acute intelligence, not just a gooey feeling.
I'd like to call upon scholars to explore the compassionate theme in their own and in other people's traditions.
And perhaps above all, to encourage a sensitivity about uncompassionate speaking, so that because people have this Charter, whatever their beliefs or lack of them, they feel empowered to challenge uncompassionate speech, disdainful remarks from their religious leaders, their political leaders, from the captains of industry.
Because we can change the world, we have the ability.
I would never have thought of putting the Charter online.
I was still stuck in the old world of a whole bunch of boffins sitting together in a room and issuing yet another arcane statement.
And TED introduced me to a whole new way of thinking and presenting ideas.
Because that is what is so wonderful about TED.
In this room, all this expertise, if we joined it all together, we could change the world.
And of course the problems sometimes seem insuperable.
But I'd just like to quote, finish at the end with a reference to a British author, an Oxford author whom I don't quote very often, C.S. Lewis.
But he wrote one thing that stuck in my mind ever since I read it when I was a schoolgirl.
It's in his book "The Four Loves."
He said that he distinguished between erotic love, when two people gaze, spellbound, into each other's eyes.
And then he compared that to friendship, when two people stand side by side, as it were, shoulder to shoulder, with their eyes fixed on a common goal.
We don't have to fall in love with each other, but we can become friends.
And I am convinced.
I felt it very strongly during our little deliberations at Vevey, that when people of all different persuasions come together, working side by side for a common goal, differences melt away.
And we learn amity.
And we learn to live together and to get to know one another.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
According to the theories of human social development, we're now living through the fourth great epoch of technological advancement, the Information Age.
Connectivity through digital technology is a modern miracle.
We can say it has broken down barriers of time and space which separate people, and it's created a condition for an age where information, ideas can be shared freely.
But are these great accomplishments in digital technology really the endgame in terms of what can be achieved?
I don't think so, and today I'd like to share with you how I believe digital technology can take us to even greater heights.
I'm a surgeon by profession, and as I stand here today talking to all of you, five billion people around the world lack access to safe surgical care.
Five billion people.
That's 70 percent of the world's population, who according to the WHO's Lancet Commission can't even access simple surgical procedures as and when they need them.
Let's zoom in on Sierra Leone, a country of six million people, where a recent study showed that there are only 10 qualified surgeons.
That's one surgeon for every 600,000 people.
The numbers are staggering, and we don't even need to look that far.
If we look around us here in the US, a recent study reported that we need an extra 100,000 surgeons by 2030 to just keep up with the demand for routine surgical procedures.
At the rate that we're going, we won't be meeting those numbers.
As a surgeon, this is a global issue that bothers me.
It bothers me a lot, because I've seen firsthand how lack of access to safe and affordable healthcare can blight the lives of ordinary people.
If you're a patient that needs an operation and there isn't a surgeon available, you're left with some really difficult choices: to wait, to travel, or not to have an operation at all.
So what's the answer?
Well, part of you are carrying some of that solution with you today: a smartphone, a tablet, a computer.
Because for me, digital communications technology has the power to do so much more than just to allow us to shop online, to connect through social media platforms and to stay up to date.
It has the power to help us solve some of the key issues that we face, like lack of access to vital surgical services.
And today I'd like to share with you an example of how I think we can make that possible.
The history of surgery is filled with breakthroughs in how science and technology was able to help the surgeons of the day face their greatest challenges.
If we go back several hundred years, an understanding of microbiology led to the development of antiseptic techniques, which played a big role in making sure patients were able to stay alive postsurgery.
Fast-forward a few hundred years and we developed keyhole or arthroscopic surgery, which combines video technology and precision instruments to make surgery less invasive.
And more recently, a lot of you will be aware of robotic surgery, and what robotics brings to surgery is much like modern automated machinery, ultraprecision, the ability to carry out procedures at the tiniest scales with a degree of accuracy that even surpasses the human hand.
But robotic surgery also introduced something else to surgery: the idea that a surgeon doesn't actually have to be standing at the patient's bedside to deliver care, that he could be looking at a screen and instructing a robot through a computer.
We call this remote surgery.
It is incumbent on us to find solutions that solve these answers in a cost-effective and scalable way, so that everyone, no matter where they are in the world, can have these problems addressed.
So what if I told you that you didn't really need a million-dollar robot to provide remote surgery?
That all you needed was a phone, a tablet, or a computer, an internet connection, a confident colleague on the ground and one magic ingredient: an augmented reality collaboration software.
Using this augmented reality collaboration software, an expert surgeon can now virtually transport himself into any clinical setting simply by using his phone or tablet or computer, and he can visually and practically interact in an operation from start to finish, guiding and mentoring a local doctor through the procedure step by step.
Well, enough of me telling you about it.
I'd now like to show you.
We're now going to go live to Dr. Marc Tompkins, an orthopedic surgeon at the University of Minnesota.
He's going to perform an arthroscopic surgery for us, a keyhole surgery of the knee, and I'd like to disclose that this patient has consented to having their operation streamed.
I'd also like to point out that in the interest of time, we're just going to go through the first steps, marking up the patient and just identifying a few key anatomical landmarks.
Hello, Dr. Tompkins, can you hear me?
Dr. Mark Tompkins: Good morning, Nadine.
Nadine Hachach-Haram: Everyone from TED says hello.
Audience: Hi.
NHH: Alright, Dr. Tompkins, let's get started.
So let's start with our incisions and where we're going to make these, on either side of the patellar tendon.
So if you can make your incisions there and there, that should hopefully get us into the knee.
MT: All right, I'm going in.
NHH: Great.
So we're just getting inside the joint now.
So why don't we go around and have a quick look at the meniscus.
MT: Perfect.
NHH: Great, so we can see there's a small tear there on the meniscus, but otherwise it looks alright.
And if you turn and head to this direction, follow my finger, let's have a quick look at the ACL and the PCL.
That's your ACL there, that looks quite healthy, no problems there.
So we've just identified that small meniscus tear there, but otherwise the fluid around the joint looks OK as well.
All right, thank you very much, Dr. Tompkins. Thank you for your time.
I'll let you continue.
Have a good day. Bye.
(Applause) So I hope through this simple demonstration I was able to illustrate to you just how powerful this technology can be.
And I'd like to point out that I wasn't using any special equipment, just my laptop and a really simple webcam.
We're so used to using digital technology to communicate through voice and text and video, but augmented reality can do something so much deeper.
It allows two people to virtually interact in a way that mimics how they would collaborate in person.
Being able to show someone what you want to do, to illustrate and demonstrate and gesture, is so much more powerful than just telling them.
And it can make for such a great learning tool, because we learn better through direct experience.
So how is this making a difference around the world?
Well, back in my teaching hospital, we've been using this to support local district general hospitals and providing skin cancer surgery and trauma treatment.
Now, patients can access care at a local level.
This reduces their travel time, improves their access, and saves money.
We've even started seeing its use in wound care management with nurses and in outpatient management.
Most recently, and quite exciting, it was used in supporting a surgeon through a cancer removal of a kidney.
And I'd like to just share with you a very quick video here.
I apologize for some of the gruesome views.
(Video) Doctor 1: OK. Show me again.
Doctor 2: If you see here, that's the upper part, the most outer part of your tumor.
Doctor 1: Yes.
Doctor 2: So it's three centimeters deep, so this should be three centimeters.
Doctor 1: Yes, yes.
Doctor 2: OK, so you need to get a 3.5 margin.
Doctor 1: I'm going to show you anyway and tell me what you think about it.
NHH: We're also seeing the use of this technology at a global scale, and one of the most heartwarming stories I can recall is from the town of Trujillo in the north of Lima in Peru, where this technology was used to support the provision of cleft lip and palate surgery to children, children from poor backgrounds who didn't have access to health insurance.
And in this town, there was a hospital with one surgeon working hard to provide this care, Dr. Soraya.
Now, Dr. Soraya was struggling under the sheer demand of her local population, as well as the fact that she wasn't specifically trained in this procedure.
And so, with the help of a charity, we were able to connect her with a cleft surgeon in California, and using this technology, he was able to guide her and her colleagues through the procedure step by step, guiding them, training them and teaching them.
Within a few months, they were able to perform 30 percent more operations with less and less complications.
And now Dr. Soraya and her team can perform these operations independently, competently and confidently.
And I remember one quote from a mother who said, "This technology gave my daughter her smile."
For me, this is the real power of this technology.
The beauty is that it breaks boundaries.
It transcends all technological difficulties.
It connects people. It democratizes access.
Wi-Fi and mobile technology are growing rapidly, and they should play a role in boosting surgical provision.
We've even seen it used in conflict zones where there's considerable risk in getting specialist surgeons to certain locations.
In a world where there are more mobile devices than there are human beings, it truly has a global reach.
Of course, we've still got a long way before we can solve the problem of getting surgery to five billion people, and unfortunately, some people still don't have access to internet.
But things are rapidly moving in the right direction.
The potential for change is there.
My team and I are growing our global footprint, and we're starting to see the potential of this technology.
Through digital technology, through simple, everyday devices that we take for granted, through devices of the future, we can really do miraculous things.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have a very difficult task.
I'm a spectroscopist.
I have to talk about astronomy without showing you any single image of nebulae or galaxies, etc.
because my job is spectroscopy.
I never deal with images.
But I'll try to convince you that spectroscopy is actually something which can change this world.
Spectroscopy can probably answer the question, "Is there anybody out there?"
Are we alone? SETI.
It's not very fun to do spectroscopy.
One of my colleagues in Bulgaria, Nevena Markova, spent about 20 years studying these profiles.
And she published 42 articles just dedicated to the subject.
Can you imagine? Day and night, thinking, observing, the same star for 20 years is incredible.
But we are crazy. We do these things.
(Laughter) And I'm not that far.
I spent about eight months working on these profiles.
Because I've noticed a very small symmetry in the profile of one of the planet host stars.
And I thought, well maybe there is Lithium-6 in this star, which is an indication that this star has swallowed a planet.
Because apparently you can't have this fragile isotope of Lithium-6 in the atmospheres of sun-like stars.
But you have it in planets and asteroids.
So if you engulf planet or large number of asteroids, you will have this Lithium-6 isotope in the spectrum of the star.
So I invested more than eight months just studying the profile of this star.
And actually it's amazing, because I got phone calls from many reporters asking, "Have you actually seen the planet going into a star?"
Because they thought that if you are having a telescope, you are an astronomer so what you are doing is actually looking in a telescope.
And you might have seen the planet going into a star.
And I was saying, "No, excuse me.
What I see is this one."
(Laughter) It's just incredible. Because nobody understood really.
I bet that there were very few people who really understood what I'm talking about.
Because this is the indication that the planet went into the star.
It's amazing.
The power of spectroscopy was actually realized by Pink Floyd already in 1973.
(Laughter) Because they actually said that you can get any color you like in a spectrum.
And all you need is time and money to make your spectrograph.
This is the number one high resolution, most precise spectrograph on this planet, called HARPS, which is actually used to detect extrasolar planets and sound waves in the atmospheres of stars.
How we get spectra?
I'm sure most of you know from school physics that it's basically splitting a white light into colors.
And if you have a liquid hot mass, it will produce something which we call a continuous spectrum.
A hot gas is producing emission lines only, no continuum.
And if you place a cool gas in front of a hot source, you will see certain patterns which we call absorption lines.
Which is used actually to identify chemical elements in a cool matter, which is absorbing exactly at those frequencies.
Now, what we can do with the spectra?
We can actually study line-of-sight velocities of cosmic objects.
And we can also study chemical composition and physical parameters of stars, galaxies, nebulae.
A star is the most simple object.
In the core, we have thermonuclear reactions going on, creating chemical elements.
And we have a cool atmosphere.
It's cool for me.
Cool in my terms is three or four or five thousand degrees.
My colleagues in infra-red astronomy call minus 200 Kelvin is cool for them.
But you know, everything is relative.
So for me 5,000 degrees is pretty cool.
(Laughter) This is the spectrum of the Sun -- 24,000 spectral lines, and about 15 percent of these lines is not yet identified.
It is amazing. So we are in the 21st century, and we still cannot properly understand the spectrum of the sun.
Sometimes we have to deal with just one tiny, weak spectral line to measure the composition of that chemical element in the atmosphere.
For instance, you see the spectral line of the gold is the only spectral line in the spectrum of the Sun.
And we use this weak feature to measure the composition of gold in the atmosphere of the Sun.
And now this is a work in progress.
We have been dealing with a similarly very weak feature, which belongs to osmium.
It's a heavy element produced in thermonuclear explosions of supernovae.
It's the only place where you can produce, actually, osmium.
Just comparing the composition of osmium in one of the planet host stars, we want to understand why there is so much of this element.
Perhaps we even think that maybe supernova explosions trigger formations of planets and stars.
It can be an indication.
The other day, my colleague from Berkeley, Gibor Basri, emailed me a very interesting spectrum, asking me, "Can you have a look at this?"
And I couldn't sleep, next two weeks, when I saw the huge amount of oxygen and other elements in the spectrum of the stars.
I knew that there is nothing like that observed in the galaxy.
It was incredible. The only conclusion we could make from this is clear evidence that there was a supernova explosion in this system, which polluted the atmosphere of this star.
And later a black hole was formed in a binary system, which is still there with a mass of about five solar masses.
This was considered as first evidence that actually black holes come from supernovae explosions.
My colleagues, comparing composition of chemical elements in different galactic stars, actually discovered alien stars in our galaxy.
It's amazing that you can go so far simply studying the chemical composition of stars.
They actually said that one of the stars you see in the spectra is an alien. It comes from a different galaxy.
There is interaction of galaxies. We know this.
And sometimes they just capture stars.
You've heard about solar flares.
We were very surprised to discover a super flare, a flare which is thousands of millions of times more powerful than those we see in the Sun.
In one of the binary stars in our galaxy called FH Leo, we discovered the super flare.
And later we went to study the spectral stars to see is there anything strange with these objects.
And we found that everything is normal.
These stars are normal like the Sun. Age, everything was normal.
So this is a mystery.
It's one of the mysteries we still have, super flares.
And there are six or seven similar cases reported in the literature.
Now to go ahead with this, we really need to understand chemical evolution of the universe.
It's very complicated. I don't really want you to try to understand what is here.
(Laughter) But it's to show you how complicated is the whole story of the production of chemical elements.
You have two channels -- the massive stars and low-mass stars -- producing and recycling matter and chemical elements in the universe.
And doing this for 14 billion years, we end up with this picture, which is a very important graph, showing relative abundances of chemical elements in sun-like stars and in the interstellar medium.
So which means that it's really impossible to find an object where you find about 10 times more sulfur than silicon, five times more calcium than oxygen. It's just impossible.
And if you find one, I will say that this is something related to SETI, because naturally you can't do it.
Doppler Effect is something very important from fundamental physics.
And this is related to the change of the frequency of a moving source.
The Doppler Effect is used to discover extrasolar planets.
The precision which we need to discover a Jupiter-like planet around a sun-like star is something like 28.4 meters per second.
And we need nine centimeters per second to detect an Earth-like planet.
This can be done with the future spectrographs.
I, myself, I'm actually involved in the team which is developing a CODEX, high resolution, future generation spectrograph for the 42 meter E-ELT telescope.
And this is going to be an instrument to detect Earth-like planets around sun-like stars.
It is an amazing tool called astroseismology where we can detect sound waves in the atmospheres of stars.
This is the sound of an Alpha Cen.
We can detect sound waves in the atmospheres of sun-like stars.
Those waves have frequencies in infrasound domain, the sound actually nobody knows, domain.
Coming back to the most important question, "Is there anybody out there?"
This is closely related to tectonic and volcanic activity of planets.
Connection between life and radioactive nuclei is straightforward.
No life without tectonic activity, without volcanic activity.
And we know very well that geothermal energy is mostly produced by decay of uranium, thorium, and potassium.
How to measure, if we have planets where the amount of those elements is small, so those planets are tectonically dead, there cannot be life.
If there is too much uranium or potassium or thorium, probably, again, there would be no life.
Because can you imagine everything boiling?
It's too much energy on a planet.
Now, we have been measuring abundance of thorium in one of the stars with extrasolar planets.
It's exactly the same game. A very tiny feature.
We are actually trying to measure this profile and to detect thorium.
It's very tough. It's very tough.
And you have to, first you have to convince yourself.
Then you have to convince your colleagues.
And then you have to convince the whole world that you have actually detected something like this in the atmosphere of an extrasolar planet host star somewhere in 100 parsec away from here.
It's really difficult.
But if you want to know about a life on extrasolar planets, you have to do this job.
Because you have to know how much of radioactive element you have in those systems.
The one way to discover about aliens is to tune your radio telescope and listen to the signals.
If you receive something interesting, well that's what SETI does actually, what SETI has been doing for many years.
I think the most promising way is to go for biomarkers.
You can see the spectrum of the Earth, this Earthshine spectrum, and that is a very clear signal.
The slope which is coming, which we call a Red Edge, is a detection of vegetated area.
It's amazing that we can detect vegetation from a spectrum.
Now imagine doing this test for other planets.
Now very recently, very recently, I'm talking about last six, seven, eight months, water, methane, carbon dioxide have been detected in the spectrum of a planet outside the solar system.
It's amazing. So this is the power of spectroscopy.
You can actually go and detect and study a chemical composition of planets far, far, far from solar system.
We have to detect oxygen or ozone to make sure that we have all necessary conditions to have life.
Cosmic miracles are something which can be related to SETI.
Now imagine an object, amazing object, or something which we cannot explain when we just stand up and say, "Look, we give up. Physics doesn't work."
So it's something which you can always refer to SETI and say, "Well, somebody must be doing this, somehow."
And with the known physics etc, it's something actually which has been pointed out by Frank Drake, many years ago, and Shklovsky.
If you see, in the spectrum of a planet host star, if you see strange chemical elements, it can be a signal from a civilization which is there and they want to signal about it.
They want to actually signal their presence through these spectral lines, in the spectrum of a star, in different ways.
There can be different ways doing this.
One is, for instance, technetium is a radioactive element with a decay time of 4.2 million years.
If you suddenly observe technetium in a sun-like star, you can be sure that somebody has put this element in the atmosphere, because in a natural way it is impossible to do this.
Now we are reviewing the spectra of about 300 stars with extrasolar planets.
And we are doing this job since 2000 and it's a very heavy project.
We have been working very hard.
And we have some interesting cases, candidates, so on, things which we can't really explain.
And I hope in the near future we can confirm this.
So the main question: "Are we alone?"
I think it will not come from UFOs.
It will not come from radio signals.
I think it will come from a spectrum like this.
It is the spectrum of a planet like Earth, showing a presence of nitrogen dioxide, as a clear signal of life, and oxygen and ozone.
If, one day, and I think it will be within 15 years from now, or 20 years.
If we discover a spectrum like this we can be sure that there is life on that planet.
In about five years we will discover planets like Earth, around sun-like stars, the same distance as the Earth from the Sun.
It will take about five years.
And then we will need another 10, 15 years with space projects to get the spectra of Earth-like planets like the one I showed you.
And if we see the nitrogen dioxide and oxygen, I think we have the perfect E.T.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I run a design studio in New York.
Every seven years, I close it for one year to pursue some little experiments, things that are always difficult to accomplish during the regular working year.
In that year, we are not available for any of our clients.
We are totally closed.
And as you can imagine, it is a lovely and very energetic time.
I originally had opened the studio in New York to combine my two loves, music and design.
And we created videos and packaging for many musicians that you know, and for even more that you've never heard of.
As I realized, just like with many many things in my life that I actually love, I adapt to it.
And I get, over time, bored by them.
And for sure, in our case, our work started to look the same.
You see here a glass eye in a die cut of a book.
Quite the similar idea, then, a perfume packaged in a book, in a die cut.
So I decided to close it down for one year.
Also is the knowledge that right now we spend about in the first 25 years of our lives learning, then there is another 40 years that's really reserved for working.
And then tacked on at the end of it are about 15 years for retirement.
And I thought it might be helpful to basically cut off five of those retirement years and intersperse them in between those working years.
(Applause) That's clearly enjoyable for myself.
But probably even more important is that the work that comes out of these years flows back into the company and into society at large, rather than just benefiting a grandchild or two.
There is a fellow TEDster who spoke two years ago, Jonathan Haidt, who defined his work into three different levels.
And they rang very true for me.
I can see my work as a job. I do it for money.
I likely already look forward to the weekend on Thursdays.
And I probably will need a hobby as a leveling mechanism.
In a career I'm definitely more engaged.
But at the same time, there will be periods when I think is all that really hard work really worth my while?
While in the third one, in the calling, very much likely I would do it also if I wouldn't be financially compensated for it.
I am not a religious person myself, but I did look for nature.
I had spent my first sabbatical in New York City.
Looked for something different for the second one.
Europe and the U.S. didn't really feel enticing because I knew them too well. So Asia it was.
The most beautiful landscapes I had seen in Asia were Sri Lanka and Bali.
Sri Lanka still had the civil war going on, so Bali it was.
It's a wonderful, very craft-oriented society.
I arrived there in September 2008, and pretty much started to work right away.
There is wonderful inspiration coming from the area itself.
However the first thing that I needed was mosquito repellent typography because they were definitely around heavily.
And then I needed some sort of way to be able to get back to all the wild dogs that surround my house, and attacked me during my morning walks.
So we created this series of 99 portraits on tee shirts.
Every single dog on one tee shirt.
As a little retaliation with a just ever so slightly menacing message (Laughter) on the back of the shirt.
(Laughter) Just before I left New York I decided I could actually renovate my studio.
And then just leave it all to them.
And I don't have to do anything.
So I looked for furniture.
And it turned out that all the furniture that I really liked, I couldn't afford.
And all the stuff I could afford, I didn't like.
So one of the things that we pursued in Bali was pieces of furniture.
This one, of course, still works with the wild dogs.
It's not quite finished yet.
And I think by the time this lamp came about, (Laughter) I had finally made peace with those dogs.
(Laughter) Then there is a coffee table. I also did a coffee table.
It's called Be Here Now.
It includes 330 compasses.
And we had custom espresso cups made that hide a magnet inside, and make those compasses go crazy, always centering on them.
Then this is a fairly talkative, verbose kind of chair.
I also started meditating for the first time in my life in Bali.
And at the same time, I'm extremely aware how boring it is to hear about other people's happinesses.
So I will not really go too far into it.
Many of you will know this TEDster, Danny Gilbert, whose book, actually, I got it through the TED book club.
I think it took me four years to finally read it, while on sabbatical.
And I was pleased to see that he actually wrote the book while he was on sabbatical.
And I'll show you a couple of people that did well by pursuing sabbaticals.
This is Ferran Adria. Many people think he is right now the best chef in the world with his restaurant north of Barcelona, El Bulli.
His restaurant is open seven months every year.
He closes it down for five months to experiment with a full kitchen staff.
His latest numbers are fairly impressive.
He can seat, throughout the year, he can seat 8,000 people.
And he has 2.2 million requests for reservations.
If I look at my cycle, seven years, one year sabbatical, it's 12.5 percent of my time.
And if I look at companies that are actually more successful than mine, 3M since the 1930s is giving all their engineers 15 percent to pursue whatever they want.
There is some good successes.
Scotch tape came out of this program, as well as Art Fry developed sticky notes from during his personal time for 3M.
Google, of course, very famously gives 20 percent for their software engineers to pursue their own personal projects.
Anybody in here has actually ever conducted a sabbatical?
That's about five percent of everybody.
So I'm not sure if you saw your neighbor putting their hand up.
Talk to them about if it was successful or not.
I've found that finding out about what I'm going to like in the future, my very best way is to talk to people who have actually done it much better than myself envisioning it.
When I had the idea of doing one, the process was I made the decision and I put it into my daily planner book.
And then I told as many, many people as I possibly could about it so that there was no way that I could chicken out later on.
(Laughter) In the beginning, on the first sabbatical, it was rather disastrous.
I had thought that I should do this without any plan, that this vacuum of time somehow would be wonderful and enticing for idea generation. It was not.
I just, without a plan, I just reacted to little requests, not work requests, those I all said no to, but other little requests.
Sending mail to Japanese design magazines and things like that.
So I became my own intern.
(Laughter) And I very quickly made a list of the things I was interested in, put them in a hierarchy, divided them into chunks of time and then made a plan, very much like in grade school.
What does it say here? Monday, 8 to 9: story writing; 9 to 10: future thinking.
Was not very successful. And so on and so forth.
And that actually, specifically as a starting point of the first sabbatical, worked really well for me.
What came out of it?
I really got close to design again.
I had fun.
Financially, seen over the long term, it was actually successful.
Because of the improved quality, we could ask for higher prices.
And probably most importantly, basically everything we've done in the seven years following the first sabbatical came out of thinking of that one single year.
And I'll show you a couple of projects that came out of the seven years following that sabbatical.
One of the strands of thinking I was involved in was that sameness is so incredibly overrated.
This whole idea that everything needs to be exactly the same works for a very very few strand of companies, and not for everybody else.
We were asked to design an identity for Casa da Musica, the Rem Koolhaas-built music center in Porto, in Portugal.
And even though I desired to do an identity that doesn't use the architecture, I failed at that.
And mostly also because I realized out of a Rem Koolhaas presentation to the city of Porto, where he talked about a conglomeration of various layers of meaning.
Which I understood after I translated it from architecture speech in to regular English, basically as logo making.
And I understood that the building itself was a logo.
So then it became quite easy.
We put a mask on it, looked at it deep down in the ground, checked it out from all sides, west, north, south, east, top and bottom.
Colored them in a very particular way by having a friend of mine write a piece of software, the Casa da Musica Logo Generator.
That's connected to a scanner.
You put any image in there, like that Beethoven image.
And the software, in a second, will give you the Casa da Musica Beethoven logo.
Which, when you actually have to design a Beethoven poster, comes in handy, because the visual information of the logo and the actual poster is exactly the same.
So it will always fit together, conceptually, of course.
If Zappa's music is performed, it gets its own logo.
Or Philip Glass or Lou Reed or the Chemical Brothers, who all performed there, get their own Casa da Musica logo.
It works the same internally with the president or the musical director, whose Casa da Musica portraits wind up on their business cards.
There is a full-blown orchestra living inside the building.
It has a more transparent identity.
The truck they go on tour with.
Or there's a smaller contemporary orchestra, 12 people that remixes its own title.
And one of the handy things that came about was that you could take the logo type and create advertising out of it.
Like this Donna Toney poster, or Chopin, or Mozart, or La Monte Young.
You can take the shape and make typography out of it.
You can grow it underneath the skin.
You can have a poster for a family event in front of the house, or a rave underneath the house or a weekly program, as well as educational services.
Second insight. So far, until that point I had been mostly involved or used the language of design for promotional purposes, which was fine with me.
On one hand I have nothing against selling.
My parents are both salespeople.
But I did feel that I spent so much time learning this language, why do I only promote with it?
There must be something else.
And the whole series of work came out of it.
Some of you might have seen it.
I showed some of it at earlier TEDs before, under the title "Things I've Learned in My Life So Far."
I'll just show two now.
This is a whole wall of bananas at different ripenesses on the opening day in this gallery in New York.
It says, "Self-confidence produces fine results."
This is after a week.
After two weeks, three weeks, four weeks, five weeks.
And you see the self confidence almost comes back, but not quite.
These are some pictures visitors sent to me.
(Laughter) And then the city of Amsterdam gave us a plaza and asked us to do something.
We used the stone plates as a grid for our little piece.
We got 250,000 coins from the central bank, at different darknesses.
So we got brand new ones, shiny ones, medium ones, and very old, dark ones.
And with the help of 100 volunteers, over a week, created this fairly floral typography that spelled, "Obsessions make my life worse and my work better."
And the idea of course was to make the type so precious that as an audience you would be in between, "Should I really take as much money as I can?
Or should I leave the piece intact as it is right now?"
While we built all this up during that week, with the 100 volunteers, a good number of the neighbors surrounding the plaza got very close to it and quite loved it.
So when it was finally done, and in the first night a guy came with big plastic bags and scooped up as many coins as he could possibly carry, one of the neighbors called the police.
And the Amsterdam police in all their wisdom, came, saw, and they wanted to protect the artwork.
And they swept it all up and put it into custody at police headquarters.
(Laughter) I think you see, you see them sweeping. You see them sweeping right here.
That's the police, getting rid of it all.
So after eight hours that's pretty much all that was left of the whole thing.
(Laughter) We are also working on the start of a bigger project in Bali.
It's a movie about happiness.
And here we asked some nearby pigs to do the titles for us.
They weren't quite slick enough.
So we asked the goose to do it again, and hoped she would do somehow, a more elegant or pretty job.
And I think she overdid it.
Just a bit too ornamental.
And my studio is very close to the monkey forest.
And the monkeys in that monkey forest looked, actually, fairly happy.
So we asked those guys to do it again.
They did a fine job, but had a couple of readability problems.
So of course whatever you don't really do yourself doesn't really get done properly.
That film we'll be working on for the next two years.
So it's going to be a while.
And of course you might think that doing a film on happiness might not really be worthwhile.
Then you can of course always go and see this guy.
Video: (Laughter) And I'm happy I'm alive.
I'm happy I'm alive. I'm happy I'm alive.
Stefan Sagmeister: Thank you.
(Applause)
Hank Willis Thomas: I'm Deb's son.
(Laughter) Deborah Willis: And I'm Hank's mom.
HWT: We've said that so many times, we've made a piece about it.
It's called "Sometimes I See Myself In You," and it speaks to the symbiotic relationship that we've developed over the years through our life and work.
And really, it's because everywhere we go, together or apart, we carry these monikers.
I've been following in my mother's footsteps since before I was even born and haven't figured out how to stop.
And as I get older, it does get harder.
No seriously, it gets harder.
(Laughter) My mother's taught me many things, though, most of all that love overrules.
She's taught me that love is an action, not a feeling.
Love is a way of being, it's a way of doing, it's a way of listening and it's a way of seeing.
DW: And also, the idea about love, photographers, they're looking for love when they make photographs.
They're looking and looking and finding love.
Growing up in North Philadelphia, I was surrounded by people in my family and friends who made photographs and used the family camera as a way of telling a story about life, about life of joy, about what it meant to become a family in North Philadelphia.
So I spent most of my life searching for pictures that reflect on ideas about black love, black joy and about family life.
So it's really important to think about the action of love overrules as a verb.
HWT: Sometimes I wonder if the love of looking is genetic, because, like my mother, I've loved photographs since before I can even remember.
I think sometimes that -- after my mother and her mother -- that photography and photographs were my first love.
No offense to my father, but that's what you get for calling me a "ham" wherever you go.
I remember whenever I'd go to my grandmother's house, she would hide all the photo albums because she was afraid of me asking, "Well, who is that in that picture?"
and "Who are they to you and who are they to me, and how old were you when that picture was taken?
How old was I when that picture was taken?
And why were they in black and white?
DW: Well, that's interesting, just to think about the world in black and white.
I grew up in a beauty shop in North Philadelphia, my mom's beauty shop, looking at "Ebony Magazine," found images that told stories that were often not in the daily news, but in the family album.
I wanted the family album to be energetic for me, a way of telling stories, and one day I happened upon a book in the Philadelphia Public Library called "The Sweet Flypaper of Life" by Roy DeCarava and Langston Hughes.
I think what attracted me as a seven-year-old, the title, flypaper and sweet, but to think about that as a seven-year-old, I looked at the beautiful images that Roy DeCarava made and then looked at ways that I could tell a story about life.
And looking for me is the act that basically changed my life.
HWT: My friend Chris Johnson told me that every photographer, every artist, is essentially trying to answer one question, and I think your question might have been, "Why doesn't the rest of the world see how beautiful we are, and what can I do to help them see our community the way I do?"
DW: While studying in art school -- it's probably true -- I had a male professor who told me that I was taking up a good man's space.
He tried to stifle my dream of becoming a photographer.
He attempted to shame me in a class full of male photographers.
He told me I was out of place and out of order as a woman, and he went on to say that all you could and would do was to have a baby when a good man could have had your seat in this class.
I was shocked into silence into that experience.
But I had my camera, and I was determined to prove to him that I was worthy for a seat in that class.
But in retrospect, I asked myself: "Why did I need to prove it to him?"
You know, I had my camera, and I knew I needed to prove to myself that I would make a difference in photography.
I love photography, and no one is going to stop me from making images.
HWT: But that's when I came in.
DW: Yeah, that year I graduated, I got pregnant.
Yep, he was right.
And I had you, and I shook off that sexist language that he used against me and picked up my camera and made photographs daily, and made photographs of my pregnant belly as I prepared for graduate school.
But I thought about also that black photographers were missing from the history books of photography, and I was looking for ways to tell a story.
And I ran across Gordon Parks' book "A Choice of Weapons," which was his autobiography.
I began photographing and making images, and I tucked away that contact sheet that I made of my pregnant belly, and then you inspired me to create a new piece, a piece that said, "A woman taking a place from a good man," "You took the space from a good man," and then I used that language and reversed it and said, "I made a space for a good man, you."
(Applause) HWT: Thanks, ma.
Like mother, like son.
I grew up in a house full of photographs.
They were everywhere, and my mother would turn the kitchen into a darkroom.
And there weren't just pictures that she took and pictures of family members.
But there were pictures on the wall of and by people that we didn't know, men and women that we didn't know.
Thanks, ma.
(Laughter) I have my own timing.
(Laughter) Did you see her poke me?
(Laughter) Puppet strings.
I grew up in a house full of photographs.
(Applause) But they weren't just pictures of men and women that we knew, but pictures of people that I didn't know, Pretty much, it was pretty clear from what I learned in school, that the rest of the world didn't either.
And it took me a long time to figure out what she was up to, but after a while, I figured it out.
When I was nine years old, she published this book, "Black Photographers, 1840-1940: A Bio-Bibliography."
And it's astounding to me to consider that in 1840, African Americans were making photographs.
What does it mean for us to think that at a time that was two, three decades before the end of slavery, that people were learning how to read, they had to learn how to do math, they had to be on the cutting edge of science and technology, to do math, physics and chemistry just to make a single photograph.
And what compelled them to do that if not love?
Well, that book led her to her next book, "Black Photographers, 1940-1988," and that book led to another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another book, and another.
(Applause) And throughout my life, she's edited and published dozens of books and curated numerous exhibitions on every continent, not all about black photographers but all inspired by the curiosity of a little black girl from North Philadelphia.
DW: What I found is that black photographers had stories to tell, and we needed to listen.
And then I found and I discovered black photographers like Augustus Washington, who made these beautiful daguerreotypes of the McGill family in the early 1840s and '50s.
Their stories tended to be different, black photographers, and they had a different narrative about black life during slavery, but it was also about family life, beauty and telling stories about community.
I didn't know how to link the stories, but I knew that teachers needed to know this story.
HWT: So I think I was my mother's first student.
Unwillingly and unwittingly -- puppet strings -- I decided to pick up a camera, and thought that I should make my own pictures about the then and now and the now and then.
I thought about how I could use photography to talk about how what's going on outside of the frame of the camera can affect what we see inside.
The truth is always in the hands of the actual image maker and it's up to us to really consider what's being cut out.
I thought I could use her research as a jumping-off point of things that I was seeing in society and I wanted to start to think about how I could use historical images to talk about the past being present and think about ways that we can speak to the perennial struggle for human rights and equal rights through my appropriation of photographs in the form of sculpture, video, installation and paintings.
But through it all, one piece has affected me the most.
It continues to nourish me.
It's based off of this photograph by Ernest Withers, who took this picture in 1968 at the Memphis Sanitation Workers March of men and women standing collectively to affirm their humanity.
They were holding signs that said "I am a man," and I found that astounding, because the phrase I grew up with wasn't "I am a man," it was "I am the man," and I was amazed at how it went from this collective statement during segregation to this seemingly selfish statement after integration.
And I wanted to ponder that, so I decided to remix that text in as many ways as I could think of, and I like to think of the top line as a timeline of American history, and the last line as a poem, and it says, "I am the man. Who's the man. You the man. What a man.
I am man. I am many. I am, am I.
I am, I am. I am, Amen.
DW: Wow, so fascinating.
(Applause) But what we learn from this experience is the most powerful two words in the English language is, "I am."
And we each have the capacity to love.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The longest journey that I have ever taken.
That was in 2002.
I was only 19 years old.
It was the first time I had ever been on an airplane and the first time that I had left my country, Rwanda.
I had to move thousands of kilometers away to follow a dream.
A dream I have had ever since I was a child.
And that dream was to become an architect.
That was impossible at the time in my country.
There were no schools of architecture.
So when I got a scholarship to study in China, I left my life and my family behind and I moved to Shanghai.
It was an amazing time.
This country was going through a major building boom.
Shanghai, my new home, was quickly turning into a skyscraper city.
China was changing.
World-class projects were built to convey a new image of development.
Modern, striking engineering marvels were going up literally everywhere.
But behind these facades, exploitation of huge numbers of migrant workers, massive displacement of thousands of people made these projects possible.
And this fast-paced development also contributed significantly to the pollution that is haunting China today.
Fast-forward to 2010, when I went back home to Rwanda.
There, I found development patterns similar to what I saw in China.
The country was and still is experiencing its own population and economic growth.
The pressure to build cities, infrastructure and buildings is at its peak, and as a result, there is a massive building boom as well.
This is the reality across the entire continent of Africa, and here's why.
By 2050, Africa's population will double, reaching 2.5 billion people.
At this point, the African population will be slightly less than the current population of China and India combined.
The infrastructure and buildings needed to accommodate this many people is unprecedented in the history of humankind.
We have estimated that by 2050, we have to build 700,000,000 more housing units, more than 300,000 schools and nearly 100,000 health centers.
Let me put that into perspective for you.
Every day for the next 35 years, we have to build seven health centers, 25 schools and nearly 60,000 housing units each day, every day.
How are we going to build all of this?
Are we going to follow a model of unsustainable building and construction similar to what I witnessed in China?
Or can we develop a uniquely African model of sustainable and equitable development?
I'm optimistic we can.
I know Africans who are already doing it.
Take Nigerian architect Kunlé Adeyemi for instance, and his work in slums of coastal megacities.
Places like Makoko in Lagos, where hundreds of thousands of people live in makeshift structures on stilts on water, without government infrastructure or services.
A community at great risk of rising sea levels and climate change.
And yet, people who live here are examples of great ingenuity and the will to survive.
Kunlé and his team have designed a prototype school that is resilient to rising sea levels.
This is Makoko School.
It's a floating prototype structure that can be adapted to clinics, to housing, to markets and other vital infrastructure this community needs.
It's an ingenious solution that can ensure this community lives safely on the waters of Lagos.
This is Francis Kéré.
He works in the country where he comes from, Burkina Faso.
Kéré and his team have designed projects that use traditional building techniques.
Kéré and his team working in the communities have developed prototype schools that the whole community, similar to every project in the villages of this country, comes together to build.
Children bring stones for the foundation, women bring water for the brick manufacturing, and everybody works together to pound the clay floors.
Working with the community, Kéré and his team have created projects that function better, with adequate lighting and adequate ventilation.
They're appropriate for this particular context and really, really beautiful as well.
For the past seven years, I have been working as an architect at MASS Design Group.
It's a design firm that began in Rwanda.
We have worked in several countries in Africa, focusing on this more equitable and sustainable model of architectural practice, and Malawi is one of those countries.
It's a country with beautiful, remote landscapes with high-peak mountains and fertile valleys.
But it also has one of the worst maternal mortality rates in the world.
A pregnant woman in Malawi either gives birth at home, or she has to walk a really long journey to the nearest clinic.
And one out of 36 of these mothers dies during childbirth.
In Malawi, with our team at MASS Design Group, we designed the Kasungu Maternity Waiting Village.
This is a place women come to six weeks before their due dates.
Here they receive prenatal care and train in nutrition and family planning.
At the same time, they form a community with other expectant mothers and their families.
The design of the of Kasungu Maternity Waiting Village borrows from the vernacular typologies of Malawi villages and is built using really simple materials and techniques.
The earth blocks that we used were made from the same soil of this site.
This reduces the carbon footprint of this building, but first and foremost, it provides a safe and dignified space for these expectant mothers.
These examples show that architecture and design have the power and the agency to address complex problems.
But more to point, that we can develop a model of effective solutions for our communities.
But these three examples are not enough.
300 more examples will not be enough.
We need a whole community of African architects and designers to lead with thousands more examples.
In May of this year, we convened a symposium on African architecture, in Kigali, and we invited many of the leading African designers and architectural educators working across the continent.
We all had one thing in common.
Every single one of us went to school abroad and outside of Africa.
This has to change.
If we are to develop solutions unique to us, rather than attempting to turn Kigali into Beijing, or Lagos into Shenzhen, we need a community that will build the design confidence of the next generation of African architects and designers.
(Applause) In September last year, we launched the African Design Centre to start building this community.
We admitted 11 fellows from across the continent.
It's a 20-month-long, design-build fellowship program.
Here, they are learning to tackle big challenges such as urbanism and climate change, as Kunlé and his team have.
They're working with communities to develop innovative building solutions and processes, as Kéré and his team have.
They're learning to understand the health impact of better buildings as we at MASS Design Group have been researching for the past several years.
The crowning moment of the fellowship is a real project that they designed and built.
This is Ruhehe Primary School, the project they designed.
They immersed themselves in the community to understand the challenges but also uncover opportunities, like using a wall made of local volcanic stone to turn the entire campus into a space of play and active learning.
They evaluated the environmental conditions and developed a roof system that maximizes daylight and improves acoustic performance.
The construction at Ruhehe Primary School will begin this year.
(Applause) And over the coming months, the African Design Centre fellows are going to work hand-in-hand with the Ruhehe community to build it.
When we asked the fellows what they want to do after their African Design Centre fellowship, Tshepo from South Africa said he wants to introduce this new way of building into his country, so he plans to open a private practice in Johannesburg.
Zani wants to expand opportunities for women to become engineers.
Before joining the African Design Centre, she helped start, in Nairobi, an organization to bridge the gender gaps for women in engineering fields, and she hopes to take this movement across Africa, eventually the whole world.
Moses, from South Sudan, the world's newest country, wants to open the first polytechnic school that will teach people how to build using local materials from his country.
Moses had to be determined to become an architect.
The civil war in his country frequently interrupted his architectural education.
At the time he was applying to join the African Design Centre, we could hear gunshots going off in the background of his interview call.
But even in the middle of this civil war, Moses hangs on to this idea that architecture can be a way to bridge communities back together.
You have to be inspired by this fellow's belief that great architecture can make a difference on how the future of Africa is built.
The unprecedented growth of Africa cannot be ignored.
Imagine Africa's future cities, but not as vast slums, but the most resilient and the most socially inclusive places on earth.
This is achievable.
And we have the talent to make it a reality.
But the journey to ready that talent for the task ahead, like my own journey, is far too long.
For the next generation of African creative leaders, we have to shorten and streamline that journey.
But most importantly -- and I cannot stress this enough -- we have to build their design confidence and empower them to develop solutions that are truly African but globally inspiring.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm really excited to be here today.
I'll show you some stuff that's just ready to come out of the lab, literally, and I'm really glad that you guys are going to be among the first to see it in person, because I really think this is going to really change the way we interact with machines from this point on.
Now, this is a rear-projected drafting table.
It's about 36 inches wide and it's equipped with a multi-touch sensor.
Normal touch sensors that you see, like on a kiosk or interactive whiteboards, can only register one point of contact at a time.
This thing allows you to have multiple points at the same time.
They can use both my hands; I can use chording actions; I can just go right up and use all 10 fingers if I wanted to.
You know, like that.
Now, multi-touch sensing isn't completely new.
People like Bill Buxton have been playing around with it in the '80s.
However, the approach I built here is actually high-resolution, low-cost, and probably most importantly, very scalable.
So, the technology, you know, isn't the most exciting thing here right now, other than probably its newfound accessibility.
What's really interesting here is what you can do with it and the kind of interfaces you can build on top of it.
So, for instance, we have a lava lamp application here.
Now, you can see, I can use both of my hands to kind of squeeze and put the blobs together.
I can inject heat into the system here, or I can pull it apart with two of my fingers.
It's completely intuitive; there's no instruction manual.
This started out as a screensaver app that one of the Ph.D. students in our lab, Ilya Rosenberg, made.
Now what's great about a multi-touch sensor is that, you know, I could be doing this with as many fingers here, but of course multi-touch also inherently means multi-user.
Chris could be interacting with another part of Lava, while I play around with it here.
You can imagine a new kind of sculpting tool, where I'm kind of warming something up, making it malleable, and then letting it cool down and solidifying in a certain state.
Google should have something like this in their lobby.
(Laughter) I'll show you a little more of a concrete example here, as this thing loads.
This is a photographer's light-box application.
Again, I can use both of my hands to interact and move photos around.
But what's even cooler is that if I have two fingers, I can actually grab a photo and then stretch it out like that really easily.
I can pan, zoom and rotate it effortlessly.
I can do that grossly with both of my hands, or I can do it just with two fingers on each of my hands together.
If I grab the canvas, I can do the same thing -- stretch it out.
I can do it simultaneously, holding this down, and gripping on another one, stretching this out.
Again, the interface just disappears here.
There's no manual.
This is exactly what you expect, especially if you haven't interacted with a computer before.
Now, when you have initiatives like the $100 laptop, I kind of cringe at the idea of introducing a whole new generation to computing with this standard mouse-and-windows-pointer interface.
This is something that I think is really the way we should be interacting with machines from now on.
(Applause) Now, of course, I can bring up a keyboard.
(Laughter) And I can bring that around, put that up there.
Obviously, this is a standard keyboard, but of course I can rescale it to make it work well for my hands.
That's really important, because there's no reason in this day and age that we should be conforming to a physical device.
That leads to bad things, like RSI.
We have so much technology nowadays that these interfaces should start conforming to us.
There's so little applied now to actually improving the way we interact with interfaces from this point on.
This keyboard is probably actually the really wrong direction to go.
You can imagine, in the future, as we develop this kind of technology, a keyboard that kind of automatically drifts as your hand moves away, and really intelligently anticipates which key you're trying to stroke.
So -- again, isn't this great?
(Laughter) Audience: Where's your lab?
Jeff Han: I'm a research scientist at NYU in New York.
Here's an example of another kind of app. I can make these little fuzz balls.
It'll remember the strokes I'm making.
It's pressure-sensitive.
What's neat about that is, I showed that two-finger gesture that zooms in really quickly.
Because you don't have to switch to a hand tool or the magnifying glass tool, you can just continuously make things in real multiple scales, all at the same time.
I can create big things out here, but I can go back and really quickly go back to where I started, and make even smaller things here.
This is going to be really important as we start getting to things like data visualization.
For instance, I think we all enjoyed Hans Rosling's talk, and he really emphasized the fact I've been thinking about for a long time: We have all this great data, but for some reason, it's just sitting there.
And one of the reasons why I think that is will be helped by things like graphics and visualization and inference tools, but I also think a big part of it is going to be having better interfaces, to be able to drill down into this kind of data, while still thinking about the big picture here.
Let me show you another app here. This is called WorldWind.
It's done by NASA.
We've all seen Google Earth; this is an open-source version of that.
There are plug-ins to be able to load in different data sets that NASA's collected over the years.
As you can see, I can use the same two-fingered gestures to go down and go in really seamlessly.
It really allows anybody to kind of go in -- and it just does what you'd expect, you know?
I can switch to different data views.
NASA's really cool.
These hyper-spectral images are false-colored so you can -- it's really good for determining vegetative use.
Well, let's go back to this.
The great thing about mapping applications -- it's not really 2D, it's 3D.
So, again, with a multi-point interface, you can do a gesture like this -- so you can be able to tilt around like that -- (Surprised laughter) It's not just simply relegated to a kind of 2D panning and motion.
This gesture is just putting two fingers down -- it's defining an axis of tilt -- and I can tilt up and down that way.
We just came up with that on the spot, it's probably not the right thing to do, but there's such interesting things you can do with this interface.
It's just so much fun playing around with it, too.
(Laughter) And so the last thing I want to show you is -- I'm sure we can all think of a lot of entertainment apps that you can do with this thing.
I'm more interested in the creative applications we can do with this.
Now, here's a simple application here -- I can draw out a curve.
And when I close it, it becomes a character.
But the neat thing about it is I can add control points.
And then what I can do is manipulate them with both of my fingers at the same time.
And you notice what it does.
It's kind of a puppeteering thing, where I can use as many fingers as I have to draw and make -- Now, there's a lot of actual math going on under here for this to control this mesh and do the right thing.
This technique of being able to manipulate a mesh here, with multiple control points, is actually state of the art.
It was released at SIGGRAPH last year.
It's a great example of the kind of research I really love: all this compute power to make things do the right things, intuitive things, to do exactly what you expect.
So, multi-touch interaction research is a very active field right now in HCI.
I'm not the only one doing it, a lot of other people are getting into it.
This kind of technology is going to let even more people get into it, I'm looking forward to interacting with all of you over the next few days and seeing how it can apply to your respective fields.
Thank you.
How do you feed a city?
It's one of the great questions of our time.
Yet it's one that's rarely asked.
We take it for granted that if we go into a shop or restaurant, or indeed into this theater's foyer in about an hour's time, there is going to be food there waiting for us, having magically come from somewhere.
But when you think that every day for a city the size of London, enough food has to be produced, transported, bought and sold, cooked, eaten, disposed of, and that something similar has to happen every day for every city on earth, it's remarkable that cities get fed at all.
We live in places like this as if they're the most natural things in the world, forgetting that because we're animals and that we need to eat, we're actually as dependent on the natural world as our ancient ancestors were.
And as more of us move into cities, more of that natural world is being transformed into extraordinary landscapes like the one behind me -- it's soybean fields in Mato Grosso in Brazil -- in order to feed us.
These are extraordinary landscapes, but few of us ever get to see them.
And increasingly these landscapes are not just feeding us either.
As more of us move into cities, more of us are eating meat, so that a third of the annual grain crop globally now gets fed to animals rather than to us human animals.
And given that it takes three times as much grain -- actually ten times as much grain -- to feed a human if it's passed through an animal first, that's not a very efficient way of feeding us.
And it's an escalating problem too.
By 2050, it's estimated that twice the number of us are going to be living in cities.
And it's also estimated that there is going to be twice as much meat and dairy consumed.
So meat and urbanism are rising hand in hand.
And that's going to pose an enormous problem.
Six billion hungry carnivores to feed, by 2050.
That's a big problem. And actually if we carry on as we are, it's a problem we're very unlikely to be able to solve.
Nineteen million hectares of rainforest are lost every year to create new arable land.
Although at the same time we're losing an equivalent amount of existing arables to salinization and erosion.
We're very hungry for fossil fuels too.
It takes about 10 calories to produce every calorie of food that we consume in the West.
And even though there is food that we are producing at great cost, we don't actually value it.
Half the food produced in the USA is currently thrown away.
And to end all of this, at the end of this long process, we're not even managing to feed the planet properly.
A billion of us are obese, while a further billion starve.
None of it makes very much sense.
And when you think that 80 percent of global trade in food now is controlled by just five multinational corporations, it's a grim picture.
As we're moving into cities, the world is also embracing a Western diet.
And if we look to the future, it's an unsustainable diet.
So how did we get here?
And more importantly, what are we going to do about it?
Well, to answer the slightly easier question first, about 10,000 years ago, I would say, is the beginning of this process in the ancient Near East, known as the Fertile Crescent.
Because, as you can see, it was crescent shaped.
And it was also fertile.
And it was here, about 10,000 years ago, that two extraordinary inventions, agriculture and urbanism, happened roughly in the same place and at the same time.
This is no accident, because agriculture and cities are bound together. They need each other.
Because it was discovery of grain by our ancient ancestors for the first time that produced a food source that was large enough and stable enough to support permanent settlements.
And if we look at what those settlements were like, we see they were compact.
They were surrounded by productive farm land and dominated by large temple complexes like this one at Ur, that were, in fact, effectively, spiritualized, central food distribution centers.
Because it was the temples that organized the harvest, gathered in the grain, offered it to the gods, and then offered the grain that the gods didn't eat back to the people.
So, if you like, the whole spiritual and physical life of these cities was dominated by the grain and the harvest that sustained them.
And in fact, that's true of every ancient city.
But of course not all of them were that small.
Famously, Rome had about a million citizens by the first century A.D.
So how did a city like this feed itself?
The answer is what I call "ancient food miles."
Basically, Rome had access to the sea, which made it possible for it to import food from a very long way away.
This is the only way it was possible to do this in the ancient world, because it was very difficult to transport food over roads, which were rough.
And the food obviously went off very quickly.
So Rome effectively waged war on places like Carthage and Egypt just to get its paws on their grain reserves.
And, in fact, you could say that the expansion of the Empire was really sort of one long, drawn out militarized shopping spree, really.
(Laughter) In fact -- I love the fact, I just have to mention this: Rome in fact used to import oysters from London, at one stage. I think that's extraordinary.
So Rome shaped its hinterland through its appetite.
But the interesting thing is that the other thing also happened in the pre-industrial world.
If we look at a map of London in the 17th century, we can see that its grain, which is coming in from the Thames, along the bottom of this map.
So the grain markets were to the south of the city.
And the roads leading up from them to Cheapside, which was the main market, were also grain markets.
And if you look at the name of one of those streets, Bread Street, you can tell what was going on there 300 years ago.
And the same of course was true for fish.
Fish was, of course, coming in by river as well. Same thing.
And of course Billingsgate, famously, was London's fish market, operating on-site here until the mid-1980s.
Which is extraordinary, really, when you think about it.
Everybody else was wandering around with mobile phones that looked like bricks and sort of smelly fish happening down on the port.
This is another thing about food in cities: Once its roots into the city are established, they very rarely move.
Meat is a very different story because, of course, animals could walk into the city.
So much of London's meat was coming from the northwest, from Scotland and Wales.
So it was coming in, and arriving at the city at the northwest, which is why Smithfield, London's very famous meat market, was located up there.
Poultry was coming in from East Anglia and so on, to the northeast.
I feel a bit like a weather woman doing this. Anyway, and so the birds were coming in with their feet protected with little canvas shoes.
And then when they hit the eastern end of Cheapside, that's where they were sold, which is why it's called Poultry.
And, in fact, if you look at the map of any city built before the industrial age, you can trace food coming in to it.
You can actually see how it was physically shaped by food, both by reading the names of the streets, which give you a lot of clues.
Friday Street, in a previous life, is where you went to buy your fish on a Friday.
But also you have to imagine it full of food.
Because the streets and the public spaces were the only places where food was bought and sold.
And if we look at an image of Smithfield in 1830 you can see that it would have been very difficult to live in a city like this and be unaware of where your food came from.
In fact, if you were having Sunday lunch, the chances were it was mooing or bleating outside your window about three days earlier.
So this was obviously an organic city, part of an organic cycle.
And then 10 years later everything changed.
This is an image of the Great Western in 1840.
And as you can see, some of the earliest train passengers were pigs and sheep.
So all of a sudden, these animals are no longer walking into market.
They're being slaughtered out of sight and mind, somewhere in the countryside.
And they're coming into the city by rail.
And this changes everything.
To start off with, it makes it possible for the first time to grow cities, really any size and shape, in any place.
Cities used to be constrained by geography; they used to have to get their food through very difficult physical means.
All of a sudden they are effectively emancipated from geography.
And as you can see from these maps of London, in the 90 years after the trains came, it goes from being a little blob that was quite easy to feed by animals coming in on foot, and so on, to a large splurge, that would be very, very difficult to feed with anybody on foot, either animals or people.
And of course that was just the beginning. After the trains came cars, and really this marks the end of this process.
It's the final emancipation of the city from any apparent relationship with nature at all.
And this is the kind of city that's devoid of smell, devoid of mess, certainly devoid of people, because nobody would have dreamed of walking in such a landscape.
In fact, what they did to get food was they got in their cars, drove to a box somewhere on the outskirts, came back with a week's worth of shopping, and wondered what on earth to do with it.
And this really is the moment when our relationship, both with food and cities, changes completely.
Here we have food -- that used to be the center, the social core of the city -- at the periphery.
It used to be a social event, buying and selling food.
Now it's anonymous.
We used to cook; now we just add water, or a little bit of an egg if you're making a cake or something.
We don't smell food to see if it's okay to eat.
We just read the back of a label on a packet.
And we don't value food. We don't trust it.
So instead of trusting it, we fear it.
And instead of valuing it, we throw it away.
One of the great ironies of modern food systems is that they've made the very thing they promised to make easier much harder.
By making it possible to build cities anywhere and any place, they've actually distanced us from our most important relationship, which is that of us and nature.
And also they've made us dependent on systems that only they can deliver, that, as we've seen, are unsustainable.
So what are we going to do about that?
It's not a new question.
500 years ago it's what Thomas More was asking himself.
This is the frontispiece of his book "Utopia."
And it was a series of semi-independent city-states, if that sounds remotely familiar, a day's walk from one another where everyone was basically farming-mad, and grew vegetables in their back gardens, and ate communal meals together, and so on.
And I think you could argue that food is a fundamental ordering principle of Utopia, even though More never framed it that way.
And here is another very famous "Utopian" vision, that of Ebenezer Howard, "The Garden City."
Same idea: series of semi-independent city-states, little blobs of metropolitan stuff with arable land around, joined to one another by railway.
And again, food could be said to be the ordering principle of his vision.
It even got built, but nothing to do with this vision that Howard had.
And that is the problem with these Utopian ideas, that they are Utopian.
Utopia was actually a word that Thomas Moore used deliberately.
It was a kind of joke, because it's got a double derivation from the Greek.
It can either mean a good place, or no place.
Because it's an ideal. It's an imaginary thing. We can't have it.
And I think, as a conceptual tool for thinking about the very deep problem of human dwelling, that makes it not much use.
So I've come up with an alternative, which is Sitopia, from the ancient Greek, "sitos" for food, and "topos" for place.
I believe we already live in Sitopia.
We live in a world shaped by food, and if we realize that, we can use food as a really powerful tool -- a conceptual tool, design tool, to shape the world differently.
So if we were to do that, what might Sitopia look like?
Well I think it looks a bit like this.
I have to use this slide. It's just the look on the face of the dog.
But anyway, this is -- (Laughter) it's food at the center of life, at the center of family life, being celebrated, being enjoyed, people taking time for it.
This is where food should be in our society.
But you can't have scenes like this unless you have people like this.
By the way, these can be men as well.
It's people who think about food, who think ahead, who plan, who can stare at a pile of raw vegetables and actually recognize them.
We need these people. We're part of a network.
Because without these kinds of people we can't have places like this.
Here, I deliberately chose this because it is a man buying a vegetable.
But networks, markets where food is being grown locally.
It's common. It's fresh.
It's part of the social life of the city.
Because without that, you can't have this kind of place, food that is grown locally and also is part of the landscape, and is not just a zero-sum commodity off in some unseen hell-hole.
Cows with a view.
Steaming piles of humus.
This is basically bringing the whole thing together.
And this is a community project I visited recently in Toronto.
It's a greenhouse, where kids get told all about food and growing their own food.
Here is a plant called Kevin, or maybe it's a plant belonging to a kid called Kevin. I don't know.
But anyway, these kinds of projects that are trying to reconnect us with nature is extremely important.
So Sitopia, for me, is really a way of seeing.
It's basically recognizing that Sitopia already exists in little pockets everywhere.
The trick is to join them up, to use food as a way of seeing.
And if we do that, we're going to stop seeing cities as big, metropolitan, unproductive blobs, like this.
We're going to see them more like this, as part of the productive, organic framework of which they are inevitably a part, symbiotically connected.
But of course, that's not a great image either, because we need not to be producing food like this anymore.
We need to be thinking more about permaculture, which is why I think this image just sums up for me the kind of thinking we need to be doing.
It's a re-conceptualization of the way food shapes our lives.
The best image I know of this is from 650 years ago.
It's Ambrogio Lorenzetti's "Allegory of Good Government."
It's about the relationship between the city and the countryside.
And I think the message of this is very clear.
If the city looks after the country, the country will look after the city.
And I want us to ask now, what would Ambrogio Lorenzetti paint if he painted this image today?
What would an allegory of good government look like today?
Because I think it's an urgent question.
It's one we have to ask, and we have to start answering.
We know we are what we eat.
We need to realize that the world is also what we eat.
But if we take that idea, we can use food as a really powerful tool to shape the world better.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
What we're really here to talk about is the "how."
Okay, so how exactly do we create this world-shattering, if you will, innovation?
Now, I want to tell you a quick story.
We'll go back a little more than a year.
In fact, the date -- I'm curious to know if any of you know what happened on this momentous date?
It was February 3rd, 2008.
Anyone remember what happened, February 3rd, 2008?
Super Bowl. I heard it over here. It was the date of the Super Bowl.
And the reason that this date was so momentous is that what my colleagues, John King and Halee Fischer-Wright, and I noticed as we began to debrief various Super Bowl parties, is that it seemed to us that across the United States, if you will, tribal councils had convened.
And they had discussed things of great national importance.
Like, "Do we like the Budweiser commercial?"
and, "Do we like the nachos?" and, "Who is going to win?"
But they also talked about which candidate they were going to support.
And if you go back in time to February 3rd, it looked like Hilary Clinton was going to get the Democratic nomination.
And there were even some polls that were saying she was going to go all the way.
But when we talked to people, it appeared that a funnel effect had happened in these tribes all across the United States.
Now what is a tribe? A tribe is a group of about 20 -- so kind of more than a team -- 20 to about 150 people.
And it's within these tribes that all of our work gets done.
But not just work. It's within these tribes that societies get built, that important things happen.
And so as we surveyed the, if you will, representatives from various tribal councils that met, also known as Super Bowl parties, we sent the following email off to 40 newspaper editors the following day.
February 4th, we posted it on our website. This was before Super Tuesday.
We said, "The tribes that we're in are saying it's going to be Obama."
Now, the reason we knew that was because we spent the previous 10 years studying tribes, studying these naturally occurring groups.
All of you are members of tribes.
In walking around at the break, many of you had met members of your tribe. And you were talking to them.
And many of you were doing what great, if you will, tribal leaders do, which is to find someone who is a member of a tribe, and to find someone else who is another member of a different tribe, and make introductions.
That is in fact what great tribal leaders do.
So here is the bottom line.
If you focus in on a group like this -- this happens to be a USC game -- and you zoom in with one of those super satellite cameras and do magnification factors so you could see individual people, you would in fact see not a single crowd, just like there is not a single crowd here, but you would see these tribes that are then coming together.
And from a distance it appears that it's a single group.
And so people form tribes.
They always have. They always will.
Just as fish swim and birds fly, people form tribes. It's just what we do.
But here's the rub.
Not all tribes are the same, and what makes the difference is the culture.
Now here is the net out of this.
You're all a member of tribes.
If you can find a way to take the tribes that you're in and nudge them forward, along these tribal stages to what we call Stage Five, which is the top of the mountain.
But we're going to start with what we call Stage One.
Now, this is the lowest of the stages.
You don't want this. Okay?
This is a bit of a difficult image to put up on the screen.
But it's one that I think we need to learn from.
Stage One produces people who do horrible things.
This is the kid who shot up Virginia Tech.
Stage One is a group where people systematically sever relationships from functional tribes, and then pool together with people who think like they do.
Stage One is literally the culture of gangs and it is the culture of prisons.
Now, again, we don't often deal with Stage One.
And I want to make the point that as members of society, we need to.
It's not enough to simply write people off.
But let's move on to Stage Two.
Now, Stage One, you'll notice, says, in effect, "Life Sucks."
So, this other book that Steve mentioned, that just came out, called "The Three Laws of Performance," my colleague, Steve Zaffron and I, argue that as people see the world, so they behave.
Well, if people see the world in such a way that life sucks, then their behavior will follow automatically from that.
It will be despairing hostility.
They'll do whatever it takes to survive, even if that means undermining other people.
Now, my birthday is coming up shortly, and my driver's license expires.
And the reason that that's relevant is that very soon I will be walking into what we call a Stage Two tribe, which looks like this.
(Laughter) Now, am I saying that in every Department of Motor Vehicles across the land, you find a Stage Two culture?
No. But in the one near me, where I have to go in just a few days, what I will say when I'm standing in line is, "How can people be so dumb, and yet live?"
(Laughter) Now, am I saying that there are dumb people working here?
Actually, no, I'm not.
But I'm saying the culture makes people dumb.
So in a Stage Two culture -- and we find these in all sorts of different places -- you find them, in fact, in the best organizations in the world.
You find them in all places in society.
I've come across them at the organizations that everybody raves about as being best in class.
But here is the point. If you believe and you say to people in your tribe, in effect, "My life sucks.
I mean, if I got to go to TEDx USC my life wouldn't suck. But I don't. So it does."
If that's how you talked, imagine what kind of work would get done.
What kind of innovation would get done?
The amount of world-changing behavior that would happen?
In fact it would be basically nil.
Now when we go on to Stage Three: this is the one that hits closest to home for many of us.
Because it is in Stage Three that many of us move.
And we park. And we stay.
Stage Three says, "I'm great. And you're not."
(Laughter) I'm great and you're not.
Now imagine having a whole room of people saying, in effect, "I'm great and you're not."
Or, "I'm going to find some way to compete with you and come out on top as a result of that."
A whole group of people communicating that way, talking that way.
I know this sounds like a joke. Three doctors walk into a bar.
But, in this case, three doctors walk into an elevator.
I happened to be in the elevator collecting data for this book.
And one doctor said to the others, "Did you see my article in the New England Journal of Medicine?"
And the other said, "No. That's great. Congratulations!"
The next one got kind of a wry smile on his face and said, "Well while you were, you know, doing your research," -- notice the condescending tone -- "While you were off doing your research, I was off doing more surgeries than anyone else in the department of surgery at this institution."
And the third one got the same wry smile and said, "Well, while you were off doing your research, and you were off doing your monkey meatball surgery, that eventually we'll train monkeys to do, or cells or robots, or maybe not even need to do it at all, I was off running the future of the residency program, which is really the future of medicine."
And they all kind of laughed and they patted him on the back.
And the elevator door opened, and they all walked out.
That is a meeting of a Stage Three tribe.
Now, we find these in places where really smart, successful people show up.
Like, oh, I don't know, TEDx USC.
(Laughter) Here is the greatest challenge we face in innovation.
It is moving from Stage Three to Stage Four.
Let's take a look at a quick video snippet.
This is from a company called Zappos, located outside Las Vegas.
And my question on the other side is just going to be, "What do you think they value?"
It was not Christmas time. There was a Christmas tree.
This is their lobby.
Employees volunteer time in the advice booth.
Notice it looks like something out of a Peanuts cartoon.
Okay, we're going through the hallway here at Zappos.
This is a call center. Notice how it's decorated.
Notice people are applauding for us.
They don't know who we are and they don't care. And if they did they probably wouldn't applaud.
But you'll notice the level of excitement.
Notice, again, how they decorate their office.
Now, what's important to people at Zappos, these may not be the things that are important to you.
But they value things like fun. And they value creativity.
One of their stated values is, "Be a little bit weird."
And you'll notice they are a little bit weird.
So when individuals come together and find something that unites them that's greater than their individual competence, then something very important happens.
The group gels. And it changes from a group of highly motivated but fairly individually-centric people into something larger, into a tribe that becomes aware of its own existence.
Stage Four tribes can do remarkable things.
But you'll notice we're not at the top of the mountain yet.
There is, in fact, another stage.
Now, some of you may not recognize the scene that's up here.
And if you take a look at the headline of Stage Five, which is "Life is Great," this may seem a little incongruous.
This is a scene or snippet from the Truth and Reconciliation process in South Africa for which Desmond Tutu won the Nobel Prize.
Now think about that. South Africa, terrible atrocities had happened in the society.
And people came together focused only on those two values: truth and reconciliation.
There was no road map. No one had ever done anything like this before.
And in this atmosphere, where the only guidance was people's values and their noble cause, what this group accomplished was historic.
And people, at the time, feared that South Africa would end up going the way that Rwanda has gone, descending into one skirmish after another in a civil war that seems to have no end.
In fact, South Africa has not gone down that road.
Largely because people like Desmond Tutu set up a Stage Five process to involve the thousands and perhaps millions of tribes in the country, to bring everyone together.
So, people hear this and they conclude the following, as did we in doing the study.
Okay, got it. I don't want to talk Stage One.
That's like, you know, "Life sucks." Who wants to talk that way?
I don't want to talk like they do at the particular DMV that's close to where Dave lives.
I really don't want to just say "I'm great," because that kind of sounds narcissistic, and then I won't have any friends.
Saying, "We're great" -- that sounds pretty good.
But I should really talk Stage Five, right? "Life is great."
Well, in fact, there are three somewhat counter-intuitive findings that come out of all this.
The first one, if you look at the Declaration of Independence and actually read it, the phrase that sticks in many of our minds is things about inalienable rights.
I mean, that's Stage Five, right? Life is great, oriented only by our values, no other guidance.
In fact, most of the document is written at Stage Two.
"My life sucks because I live under a tyrant, also known as King George.
We're great! Who is not great? England!"
Sorry. (Laughter) Well, what about other great leaders? What about Gandhi?
What about Martin Luther King?
I mean, surely these were just people who preached, "Life is great," right?
Just one little bit of happiness and joy after another.
In fact, Martin Luther King's most famous line was at Stage Three.
He didn't say "We have a dream." He said, "I have a dream."
Why did he do that? Because most people are not at Stage Five.
Two percent are at Stage One.
About 25 percent are at Stage Two, saying, in effect, "My life sucks."
48 percent of working tribes say, these are employed tribes, say, "I'm great and you're not."
And we have to duke it out every day, so we resort to politics.
Only about 22 percent of tribes are at Stage Four, oriented by our values, saying "We're great.
And our values are beginning to unite us."
Only two percent, only two percent of tribes get to Stage Five.
And those are the ones that change the world.
So the first little finding from this is that leaders need to be able to talk all the levels so that you can touch every person in society.
But you don't leave them where you found them. Okay?
Tribes can only hear one level above and below where they are.
So we have to have the ability to talk all the levels, to go to where they are.
And then leaders nudge people within their tribes to the next level.
I'd like to show you some examples of this.
One of the people we interviewed was Frank Jordan, former Mayor of San Francisco. Before that he was Chief of Police in San Francisco.
And he grew up essentially in Stage One.
And you know what changed his life? It was walking into one of these, a Boys and Girls Club.
Now here is what happened to this person who eventually became Mayor of San Francisco.
He went from being alive and passionate at Stage One -- remember, "Life sucks, despairing hostility, I will do whatever it takes to survive" -- to walking into a Boys and Girls Club, folding his arms, sitting down in a chair, and saying, "Wow. My life really sucks.
I don't know anybody.
I mean, if I was into boxing, like they were, then my life wouldn't suck. But I don't. So it does.
So I'm going to sit here in my chair and not do anything."
In fact, that's progress.
We move people from Stage One to Stage Two by getting them in a new tribe and then, over time, getting them connected.
So, what about moving from Stage Three to Stage Four?
I want to argue that we're doing that right here.
TED represents a set of values, and as we unite around these values, something really interesting begins to emerge.
If you want this experience to live on as something historic, then at the reception tonight I'd like to encourage you to do something beyond what people normally do and call networking.
Which is not just to meet new people and extend your reach, extend your influence, but instead, find someone you don't know, and find someone else you don't know, and introduce them.
That's called a triadic relationship.
See, people who build world-changing tribes do that.
They extend the reach of their tribes by connecting them, not just to myself, so that my following is greater, but I connect people who don't know each other to something greater than themselves.
And ultimately that adds to their values.
But we're not done yet. Because then how do we go from Stage Four, which is great, to Stage Five?
The story that I like to end with is this. It comes out of a place called the Gallup Organization.
You know they do polls, right?
So it's Stage Four. We're great. Who is not great?
Pretty much everybody else who does polls.
If Gallup releases a poll on the same day that NBC releases a poll, people will pay attention to the Gallup poll. Okay, we understand that.
So, they were bored.
They wanted to change the world. So here is the question someone asked.
"How could we, instead of just polling what Asia thinks or what the United States thinks, or who thinks what about Obama versus McCain or something like that, what does the entire world think?"
And they found a way to do the first-ever world poll.
They had people involved who were Nobel laureates in economics, who reported being bored.
And suddenly they pulled out sheets of paper and were trying to figure out, "How do we survey the population of Sub-Saharan Africa?
How do we survey populations that don't have access to technology, and speak languages we don't speak, and we don't know anyone who speaks those languages. Because in order to achieve on this great mission, we have to be able to do it.
Incidentally, they did pull it off.
And they released the first-ever world poll.
So I'd like to leave you with these thoughts.
First of all: we all form tribes, all of us.
You're in tribes here. Hopefully you're extending the reach of the tribes that you have.
But the question on the table is this: What kind of an impact are the tribes that you are in making?
You're hearing one presentation after another, often representing a group of people, a tribe, about how they have changed the world.
If you do what we've talked about, you listen for how people actually communicate in the tribes that you're in.
And you don't leave them where they are. You nudge them forward.
You remember to talk all five culture stages.
Because we've got people in all five, around us.
And the question that I'd like to leave you with is this: Will your tribes change the world?
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm a storyteller.
And I would like to tell you a few personal stories about what I like to call "the danger of the single story."
I grew up on a university campus in eastern Nigeria.
My mother says that I started reading at the age of two, although I think four is probably close to the truth.
So I was an early reader, and what I read were British and American children's books.
I was also an early writer, and when I began to write, at about the age of seven, stories in pencil with crayon illustrations that my poor mother was obligated to read, I wrote exactly the kinds of stories I was reading: All my characters were white and blue-eyed, they played in the snow, they ate apples, (Laughter) and they talked a lot about the weather, how lovely it was that the sun had come out.
(Laughter) Now, this despite the fact that I lived in Nigeria.
I had never been outside Nigeria.
We didn't have snow, we ate mangoes, and we never talked about the weather, because there was no need to.
My characters also drank a lot of ginger beer, because the characters in the British books I read drank ginger beer.
Never mind that I had no idea what ginger beer was.
(Laughter) And for many years afterwards, I would have a desperate desire to taste ginger beer.
But that is another story.
What this demonstrates, I think, is how impressionable and vulnerable we are in the face of a story, particularly as children.
Because all I had read were books in which characters were foreign, I had become convinced that books by their very nature had to have foreigners in them and had to be about things with which I could not personally identify.
Now, things changed when I discovered African books.
There weren't many of them available, and they weren't quite as easy to find as the foreign books.
But because of writers like Chinua Achebe and Camara Laye, I went through a mental shift in my perception of literature.
I realized that people like me, girls with skin the color of chocolate, whose kinky hair could not form ponytails, could also exist in literature.
I started to write about things I recognized.
Now, I loved those American and British books I read.
They stirred my imagination. They opened up new worlds for me.
But the unintended consequence was that I did not know that people like me could exist in literature.
So what the discovery of African writers did for me was this: It saved me from having a single story of what books are.
I come from a conventional, middle-class Nigerian family.
My father was a professor.
My mother was an administrator.
And so we had, as was the norm, live-in domestic help, who would often come from nearby rural villages.
So, the year I turned eight, we got a new house boy.
His name was Fide.
The only thing my mother told us about him was that his family was very poor.
My mother sent yams and rice, and our old clothes, to his family.
And when I didn't finish my dinner, my mother would say, "Finish your food! Don't you know? People like Fide's family have nothing."
So I felt enormous pity for Fide's family.
Then one Saturday, we went to his village to visit, and his mother showed us a beautifully patterned basket made of dyed raffia that his brother had made.
I was startled.
It had not occurred to me that anybody in his family could actually make something.
All I had heard about them was how poor they were, so that it had become impossible for me to see them as anything else but poor.
Their poverty was my single story of them.
Years later, I thought about this when I left Nigeria to go to university in the United States.
I was 19.
My American roommate was shocked by me.
She asked where I had learned to speak English so well, and was confused when I said that Nigeria happened to have English as its official language.
She asked if she could listen to what she called my "tribal music," and was consequently very disappointed when I produced my tape of Mariah Carey.
(Laughter) She assumed that I did not know how to use a stove.
What struck me was this: She had felt sorry for me even before she saw me.
Her default position toward me, as an African, was a kind of patronizing, well-meaning pity.
My roommate had a single story of Africa: a single story of catastrophe.
In this single story, there was no possibility of Africans being similar to her in any way, no possibility of feelings more complex than pity, no possibility of a connection as human equals.
I must say that before I went to the U.S., I didn't consciously identify as African.
But in the U.S., whenever Africa came up, people turned to me.
Never mind that I knew nothing about places like Namibia.
But I did come to embrace this new identity, and in many ways I think of myself now as African.
Although I still get quite irritable when Africa is referred to as a country, the most recent example being my otherwise wonderful flight from Lagos two days ago, in which there was an announcement on the Virgin flight about the charity work in "India, Africa and other countries."
(Laughter) So, after I had spent some years in the U.S. as an African, I began to understand my roommate's response to me.
If I had not grown up in Nigeria, and if all I knew about Africa were from popular images, I too would think that Africa was a place of beautiful landscapes, beautiful animals, and incomprehensible people, fighting senseless wars, dying of poverty and AIDS, unable to speak for themselves and waiting to be saved by a kind, white foreigner.
I would see Africans in the same way that I, as a child, had seen Fide's family.
This single story of Africa ultimately comes, I think, from Western literature.
Now, here is a quote from the writing of a London merchant called John Lok, who sailed to west Africa in 1561 and kept a fascinating account of his voyage.
After referring to the black Africans as "beasts who have no houses," he writes, "They are also people without heads, having their mouth and eyes in their breasts."
Now, I've laughed every time I've read this.
And one must admire the imagination of John Lok.
But what is important about his writing is that it represents the beginning of a tradition of telling African stories in the West: A tradition of Sub-Saharan Africa as a place of negatives, of difference, of darkness, of people who, in the words of the wonderful poet Rudyard Kipling, are "half devil, half child."
And so, I began to realize that my American roommate must have throughout her life seen and heard different versions of this single story, as had a professor, who once told me that my novel was not "authentically African."
Now, I was quite willing to contend that there were a number of things wrong with the novel, that it had failed in a number of places, but I had not quite imagined that it had failed at achieving something called African authenticity.
In fact, I did not know what African authenticity was.
The professor told me that my characters were too much like him, an educated and middle-class man.
My characters drove cars.
They were not starving.
Therefore they were not authentically African.
But I must quickly add that I too am just as guilty in the question of the single story.
A few years ago, I visited Mexico from the U.S.
The political climate in the U.S. at the time was tense, and there were debates going on about immigration.
And, as often happens in America, immigration became synonymous with Mexicans.
There were endless stories of Mexicans as people who were fleecing the healthcare system, sneaking across the border, being arrested at the border, that sort of thing.
I remember walking around on my first day in Guadalajara, watching the people going to work, rolling up tortillas in the marketplace, smoking, laughing.
I remember first feeling slight surprise.
And then, I was overwhelmed with shame.
I realized that I had been so immersed in the media coverage of Mexicans that they had become one thing in my mind, the abject immigrant.
I had bought into the single story of Mexicans and I could not have been more ashamed of myself.
So that is how to create a single story, show a people as one thing, as only one thing, over and over again, and that is what they become.
It is impossible to talk about the single story without talking about power.
There is a word, an Igbo word, that I think about whenever I think about the power structures of the world, and it is "nkali."
It's a noun that loosely translates to "to be greater than another."
Like our economic and political worlds, stories too are defined by the principle of nkali: How they are told, who tells them, when they're told, how many stories are told, are really dependent on power.
Power is the ability not just to tell the story of another person, but to make it the definitive story of that person.
The Palestinian poet Mourid Barghouti writes that if you want to dispossess a people, the simplest way to do it is to tell their story and to start with, "secondly."
Start the story with the arrows of the Native Americans, and not with the arrival of the British, and you have an entirely different story.
Start the story with the failure of the African state, and not with the colonial creation of the African state, and you have an entirely different story.
I recently spoke at a university where a student told me that it was such a shame that Nigerian men were physical abusers like the father character in my novel.
I told him that I had just read a novel called "American Psycho" -- (Laughter) -- and that it was such a shame that young Americans were serial murderers.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, obviously I said this in a fit of mild irritation.
(Laughter) But it would never have occurred to me to think that just because I had read a novel in which a character was a serial killer that he was somehow representative of all Americans.
This is not because I am a better person than that student, but because of America's cultural and economic power, I had many stories of America.
I had read Tyler and Updike and Steinbeck and Gaitskill.
I did not have a single story of America.
When I learned, some years ago, that writers were expected to have had really unhappy childhoods to be successful, I began to think about how I could invent horrible things my parents had done to me.
(Laughter) But the truth is that I had a very happy childhood, full of laughter and love, in a very close-knit family.
But I also had grandfathers who died in refugee camps.
My cousin Polle died because he could not get adequate healthcare.
One of my closest friends, Okoloma, died in a plane crash because our fire trucks did not have water.
I grew up under repressive military governments that devalued education, so that sometimes, my parents were not paid their salaries.
And so, as a child, I saw jam disappear from the breakfast table, then margarine disappeared, then bread became too expensive, then milk became rationed.
And most of all, a kind of normalized political fear invaded our lives.
All of these stories make me who I am.
But to insist on only these negative stories is to flatten my experience and to overlook the many other stories that formed me.
The single story creates stereotypes, and the problem with stereotypes is not that they are untrue, but that they are incomplete.
They make one story become the only story.
Of course, Africa is a continent full of catastrophes: There are immense ones, such as the horrific rapes in Congo and depressing ones, such as the fact that 5,000 people apply for one job vacancy in Nigeria.
But there are other stories that are not about catastrophe, and it is very important, it is just as important, to talk about them.
I've always felt that it is impossible to engage properly with a place or a person without engaging with all of the stories of that place and that person.
The consequence of the single story is this: It robs people of dignity.
It makes our recognition of our equal humanity difficult.
It emphasizes how we are different rather than how we are similar.
So what if before my Mexican trip, I had followed the immigration debate from both sides, the U.S. and the Mexican?
What if my mother had told us that Fide's family was poor and hardworking?
What if we had an African television network that broadcast diverse African stories all over the world?
What the Nigerian writer Chinua Achebe calls "a balance of stories."
What if my roommate knew about my Nigerian publisher, Muhtar Bakare, a remarkable man who left his job in a bank to follow his dream and start a publishing house?
Now, the conventional wisdom was that Nigerians don't read literature.
He disagreed.
He felt that people who could read, would read, if you made literature affordable and available to them.
Shortly after he published my first novel, I went to a TV station in Lagos to do an interview, and a woman who worked there as a messenger came up to me and said, "I really liked your novel. I didn't like the ending.
Now, you must write a sequel, and this is what will happen ..."
(Laughter) And she went on to tell me what to write in the sequel.
I was not only charmed, I was very moved.
Here was a woman, part of the ordinary masses of Nigerians, who were not supposed to be readers.
She had not only read the book, but she had taken ownership of it and felt justified in telling me what to write in the sequel.
Now, what if my roommate knew about my friend Funmi Iyanda, a fearless woman who hosts a TV show in Lagos, and is determined to tell the stories that we prefer to forget?
What if my roommate knew about the heart procedure that was performed in the Lagos hospital last week?
What if my roommate knew about contemporary Nigerian music, talented people singing in English and Pidgin, and Igbo and Yoruba and Ijo, mixing influences from Jay-Z to Fela to Bob Marley to their grandfathers.
What if my roommate knew about the female lawyer who recently went to court in Nigeria to challenge a ridiculous law that required women to get their husband's consent before renewing their passports?
What if my roommate knew about Nollywood, full of innovative people making films despite great technical odds, films so popular that they really are the best example of Nigerians consuming what they produce?
What if my roommate knew about my wonderfully ambitious hair braider, who has just started her own business selling hair extensions?
Or about the millions of other Nigerians who start businesses and sometimes fail, but continue to nurse ambition?
Every time I am home I am confronted with the usual sources of irritation for most Nigerians: our failed infrastructure, our failed government, but also by the incredible resilience of people who thrive despite the government, rather than because of it.
I teach writing workshops in Lagos every summer, and it is amazing to me how many people apply, how many people are eager to write, to tell stories.
My Nigerian publisher and I have just started a non-profit called Farafina Trust, and we have big dreams of building libraries and refurbishing libraries that already exist and providing books for state schools that don't have anything in their libraries, and also of organizing lots and lots of workshops, in reading and writing, for all the people who are eager to tell our many stories.
Stories matter.
Many stories matter.
Stories have been used to dispossess and to malign, but stories can also be used to empower and to humanize.
Stories can break the dignity of a people, but stories can also repair that broken dignity.
The American writer Alice Walker wrote this about her Southern relatives who had moved to the North.
She introduced them to a book about the Southern life that they had left behind.
"They sat around, reading the book themselves, listening to me read the book, and a kind of paradise was regained."
I would like to end with this thought: That when we reject the single story, when we realize that there is never a single story about any place, we regain a kind of paradise.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to start with a game. Okay?
And to win this game, all you have to do is see the reality that's in front of you as it really is, all right?
So we have two panels here, of colored dots.
And one of those dots is the same in the two panels.
And you have to tell me which one.
Now, I narrowed it down to the gray one, the green one, and, say, the orange one.
So by a show of hands, we'll start with the easiest one.
Show of hands: how many people think it's the gray one?
Really? Okay.
How many people think it's the green one?
And how many people think it's the orange one?
Pretty even split.
Let's find out what the reality is.
Here is the orange one.
(Laughter) Here is the green one.
And here is the gray one.
(Laughter) So for all of you who saw that, you're complete realists.
(Laughter) So this is pretty amazing, isn't it?
Because nearly every living system has evolved the ability to detect light in one way or another.
So for us, seeing color is one of the simplest things the brain does.
And yet, even at this most fundamental level, context is everything.
What I'm going to talk about is not that context is everything, but why context is everything.
Because it's answering that question that tells us not only why we see what we do, but who we are as individuals, and who we are as a society.
But first, we have to ask another question, which is, "What is color for?"
And instead of telling you, I'll just show you.
What you see here is a jungle scene, and you see the surfaces according to the amount of light that those surfaces reflect.
Now, can any of you see the predator that's about to jump out at you?
And if you haven't seen it yet, you're dead, right?
(Laughter) Can anyone see it? Anyone? No?
Now let's see the surfaces according to the quality of light that they reflect.
And now you see it.
So, color enables us to see the similarities and differences between surfaces, according to the full spectrum of light that they reflect.
But what you've just done is in many respects mathematically impossible.
Why?
Because, as Berkeley tells us, we have no direct access to our physical world, other than through our senses.
And the light that falls onto our eyes is determined by multiple things in the world, not only the color of objects, but also the color of their illumination, and the color of the space between us and those objects.
You vary any one of those parameters, and you'll change the color of the light that falls onto your eye.
This is a huge problem, because it means that the same image could have an infinite number of possible real-world sources.
Let me show you what I mean.
And these are two projections from the world.
They're identical in every single way.
Identical in shape, size, spectral content.
They are the same, as far as your eye is concerned.
And yet they come from completely different sources.
The one on the right comes from a yellow surface, in shadow, oriented facing the left, viewed through a pinkish medium.
The one on the left comes from an orange surface, under direct light, facing to the right, viewed through sort of a bluish medium.
Completely different meanings, giving rise to the exact same retinal information.
And yet it's only the retinal information that we get.
So how on Earth do we even see?
So if you remember anything in this next 18 minutes, remember this: that the light that falls onto your eye, sensory information, is meaningless, because it could mean literally anything.
And what's true for sensory information is true for information generally.
There's no inherent meaning in information.
It's what we do with that information that matters.
So, how do we see? Well, we see by learning to see.
The brain evolved the mechanisms for finding patterns, finding relationships in information, and associating those relationships with a behavioral meaning, a significance, by interacting with the world.
We're very aware of this in the form of more cognitive attributes, like language.
I'm going to give you some letter strings, and I want you to read them out for me, if you can.
Audience: "Can you read this?"
"You are not reading this."
"What are you reading?"
Beau Lotto: "What are you reading?" Half the letters are missing, right?
There's no a priori reason why an "H" has to go between that "W" and "A."
But you put one there. Why?
Because in the statistics of your past experience, it would have been useful to do so.
And yet you don't put a letter after that first "T."
Why? Because it wouldn't have been useful in the past.
So you don't do it again.
So, let me show you how quickly our brains can redefine normality, even at the simplest thing the brain does, which is color.
So if I could have the lights down up here.
I want you to first notice that those two desert scenes are physically the same.
One is simply the flipping of the other.
Now I want you to look at that dot between the green and the red.
And I want you to stare at that dot. Don't look anywhere else.
We're going to look at it for about 30 seconds, which is a bit of a killer in an 18-minute talk.
(Laughter) But I really want you to learn.
And I'll tell you -- don't look anywhere else -- I'll tell you what's happening in your head.
Your brain is learning, and it's learning that the right side of its visual field is under red illumination; the left side of its visual field is under green illumination.
That's what it's learning. Okay?
Now, when I tell you, I want you to look at the dot between the two desert scenes.
So why don't you do that now?
(Laughter) Can I have the lights up again?
I take it from your response they don't look the same anymore, right?
(Applause) Why? Because your brain is seeing that same information as if the right one is still under red light, and the left one is still under green light.
Okay? So, what does this mean for context?
It means I can take two identical squares, put them in light and dark surrounds, and the one on the dark surround looks lighter than on the light surround.
What's significant is not simply the light and dark surrounds that matter.
It's what those light and dark surrounds meant for your behavior in the past.
So I'll show you what I mean.
Here we have that exact same illusion.
We have two identical tiles on the left, one in a dark surround, one in a light surround.
And the same thing over on the right.
Now, I'll reveal those two scenes, but I'm not going to change anything within those boxes, except their meaning.
And see what happens to your perception.
Notice that on the left the two tiles look nearly completely opposite: one very white and one very dark, right?
Whereas on the right, the two tiles look nearly the same.
And yet there is still one on a dark surround, and one on a light surround.
Why?
Because if the tile in that shadow were in fact in shadow, and reflecting the same amount of light to your eye as the one outside the shadow, it would have to be more reflective -- just the laws of physics.
So you see it that way.
Whereas on the right, the information is consistent with those two tiles being under the same light.
If they're under the same light reflecting the same amount of light to your eye, then they must be equally reflective.
So you see it that way.
Which means we can bring all this information together to create some incredibly strong illusions.
This is one I made a few years ago.
And you'll notice you see a dark brown tile at the top, and a bright orange tile at the side.
That is your perceptual reality.
The physical reality is that those two tiles are the same.
Here you see four gray tiles on your left, seven gray tiles on the right.
I'm not going to change those tiles at all, but I'm going to reveal the rest of the scene.
And see what happens to your perception.
The four blue tiles on the left are gray.
The seven yellow tiles on the right are also gray.
They are the same. Okay?
Don't believe me? Let's watch it again.
What's true for color is also true for complex perceptions of motion.
So, here we have -- let's turn this around -- a diamond.
And what I'm going to do is, I'm going to hold it here, and I'm going to spin it.
And for all of you, you'll see it probably spinning this direction.
Now I want you to keep looking at it.
Move your eyes around, blink, maybe close one eye.
And suddenly it will flip, and start spinning the opposite direction.
Yes? Raise your hand if you got that. Yes?
Keep blinking.
So I can ask you, which direction is it rotating?
How do you know?
Your brain doesn't know, because both are equally likely.
So depending on where it looks, it flips between the two possibilities.
Are we the only ones that see illusions?
The answer to this question is no.
Even the beautiful bumblebee, with its mere one million brain cells, which is 250 times fewer cells than you have in one retina, sees illusions, does the most complicated things that even our most sophisticated computers can't do.
So in my lab we work on bumblebees, because we can completely control their experience, and see how it alters the architecture of their brain.
Here you have the hive.
You can see the queen bee, the large bee in the middle.
Those are her daughters, the eggs.
They go back and forth between this hive and the arena, via this tube.
You'll see one of the bees come out here.
You see how she has a little number on her?
There's another one coming out, she also has a number on her.
Now, they're not born that way, right?
We pull them out, put them in the fridge, and they fall asleep.
Then you can superglue little numbers on them.
(Laughter) And now, in this experiment they get a reward if they go to the blue flowers.
They land on the flower, stick their tongue in there, called a proboscis, and drink sugar water.
She's drinking a glass of water that's about that big to you and I, will do that about three times, then fly.
And sometimes they learn not to go to the blue, but to go where the other bees go.
So they copy each other.
And here she comes down the ladder.
And she'll come into the hive, find an empty honey pot, and throw up, and that's honey.
(Laughter) Now remember, she's supposed to be going to the blue flowers, but what are these bees doing in the upper right corner?
It looks like they're going to green flowers.
Now, are they getting it wrong?
And the answer to the question is no. Those are actually blue flowers.
But those are blue flowers under green light.
So they're using the relationships between the colors to solve the puzzle, which is exactly what we do.
So, illusions are often used, especially in art, in the words of a more contemporary artist, "to demonstrate the fragility of our senses."
Okay, this is complete rubbish.
The senses aren't fragile. And if they were, we wouldn't be here.
Instead, color tells us something completely different, that the brain didn't actually evolve to see the world the way it is.
We can't.
Instead, the brain evolved to see the world the way it was useful to see in the past.
And how we see is by continually redefining normality.
So, how can we take this incredible capacity of plasticity of the brain and get people to experience their world differently?
Well, one of the ways we do it in my lab and studio is we translate the light into sound, and we enable people to hear their visual world.
And they can navigate the world using their ears.
Here's David on the right, and he's holding a camera.
On the left is what his camera sees.
And you'll see there's a faint line going across that image.
That line is broken up into 32 squares.
In each square, we calculate the average color.
And then we just simply translate that into sound.
And now he's going to turn around, close his eyes, and find a plate on the ground with his eyes closed.
(Continuous sound) (Sound changes momentarily) (Sound changes momentarily) (Sound changes momentarily) (Sound changes momentarily) (Sound changes momentarily) Beau Lotto: He finds it. Amazing, right?
So not only can we create a prosthetic for the visually impaired, but we can also investigate how people literally make sense of the world.
But we can also do something else.
So, working with kids, they created images, thinking about what might the images you see sound like if we could listen to them.
And then we translated these images.
And this is one of those images.
And this is a six-year-old child composing a piece of music for a 32-piece orchestra.
And this is what it sounds like.
(Electronic representation of orchestral music) So, a six-year-old child. Okay?
Now, what does all this mean?
What this suggests is that no one is an outside observer of nature, okay?
We're not defined by our central properties, by the bits that make us up.
We're defined by our environment and our interaction with that environment, by our ecology.
And that ecology is necessarily relative, historical and empirical.
So, what I'd like to finish with is this over here.
Because what I've been trying to do is really celebrate uncertainty.
Because I think only through uncertainty is there potential for understanding.
So, if some of you are still feeling a bit too certain, I'd like to do this one.
So, if we have the lights down.
And what we have here -- Can everyone see 25 purple surfaces on your left, and 25, call it yellowish, surfaces on your right?
So now, what I want to do, I'm going to put the middle nine surfaces here under yellow illumination, by simply putting a filter behind them.
Now you can see that changes the light that's coming through there, right?
Because now the light is going through a yellowish filter and then a purplish filter.
I'm going to do the opposite on the left here.
I'm going to put the middle nine under a purplish light.
Now, some of you will have noticed that the consequence is that the light coming through those middle nine on the right, or your left, is exactly the same as the light coming through the middle nine on your right.
Agreed? Yes?
Okay. So they are physically the same.
Let's pull the covers off.
Now remember -- you know that the middle nine are exactly the same.
Do they look the same?
No.
And I'll leave you with that.
So, thank you very much.
(Laughter) (Applause)
So, I am indeed going to talk about the spaces men create for themselves, but first I want to tell you why I'm here.
I'm here for two reasons. These two guys are my two sons Ford and Wren.
When Ford was about three years old, we shared a very small room together, in a very small space.
My office was on one half of the bedroom, and his bedroom was on the other half.
And you can imagine, if you're a writer, that things would get really crowded around deadlines.
So when Wren was on the way, I realized I needed to find a space of my own.
There was no more space in the house. So I went out to the backyard, and without any previous building experience, and about 3,000 dollars and some recycled materials, I built this space.
It had everything I needed. It was quiet.
There was enough space. And I had control, which was very important.
As I was building this space, I thought to myself, "Surely I'm not the only guy to have to have carved out a space for his own."
So I did some research.
And I found that there was an historic precedence.
Hemingway had his writing space.
Elvis had two or three manspaces, which is pretty unique because he lived with both his wife and his mother in Graceland.
In the popular culture, Superman had the Fortress of Solitude, and there was, of course, the Batcave.
So I realized then that I wanted to go out on a journey and see what guys were creating for themselves now.
Here is one of the first spaces I found. It is in Austin, Texas, which is where I'm from.
On the outside it looks like a very typical garage, a nice garage.
But on the inside, it's anything but.
And this, to me, is a pretty classic manspace.
It has neon concert posters, a bar and, of course, the leg lamp, which is very important.
I soon realized that manspaces didn't have to be only inside.
This guy built a bowling alley in his backyard, out of landscaping timbers, astroturf.
And he found the scoreboard in the trash.
Here's another outdoor space, a little bit more sophisticated.
This a 1923 wooden tugboat, made completely out of Douglas fir.
The guy did it all himself.
And there is about 1,000 square feet of hanging-out space inside.
So, pretty early on in my investigations I realized what I was finding was not what I expected to find, which was, quite frankly, a lot of beer can pyramids and overstuffed couches and flat-screen TVs.
There were definitely hang-out spots.
But some were for working, some were for playing, some were for guys to collect their things.
Most of all, I was just surprised with what I was finding.
Take this place for example.
On the outside it looks like a typical northeastern garage.
This is in Long Island, New York.
The only thing that might tip you off is the round window.
On the inside it's a recreation of a 16th century Japanese tea house.
The man imported all the materials from Japan, and he hired a Japanese carpenter to build it in the traditional style.
It has no nails or screws.
All the joints are hand-carved and hand-scribed.
Here is another pretty typical scene. This is a suburban Las Vegas neighborhood.
But you open one of the garage doors and there is a professional-size boxing ring inside.
(Laughter) And so there is a good reason for this.
It was built by this man who is Wayne McCullough.
He won the silver medal for Ireland in the 1992 Olympics, and he trains in this space. He trains other people.
And right off the garage he has his own trophy room where he can sort of bask in his accomplishments, which is another sort of important part about a manspace.
So, while this space represents someone's profession, this one certainly represents a passion.
It's made to look like the inside of an English sailing ship.
It's a collection of nautical antiques from the 1700s and 1800s.
Museum quality.
So, as I came to the end of my journey, I found over 50 spaces.
And they were unexpected and they were surprising.
But they were also -- I was really impressed by how personalized they were, and how much work went into them.
And I realized that's because the guys that I met were all very passionate about what they did.
And they really loved their professions.
And they were very passionate about their collections and their hobbies.
And so they created these spaces to reflect what they love to do, and who they were.
So if you don't have a space of your own, I highly recommend finding one, and getting into it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The substance of things unseen.
Cities, past and future.
In Oxford, perhaps we can use Lewis Carroll and look in the looking glass that is New York City to try and see our true selves, or perhaps pass through to another world.
Or, in the words of F. Scott Fitzgerald, "As the moon rose higher, the inessential houses began to melt away until gradually I became aware of the old island here that once flowered for Dutch sailors' eyes, a fresh green breast of the new world."
My colleagues and I have been working for 10 years to rediscover this lost world in a project we call The Mannahatta Project.
We're trying to discover what Henry Hudson would have seen on the afternoon of September 12th, 1609, when he sailed into New York harbor.
And I'd like to tell you the story in three acts, and if I have time still, an epilogue.
So, Act I: A Map Found.
So, I didn't grow up in New York.
I grew up out west in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, like you see here, in the Red Rock Canyon.
And from these early experiences as a child I learned to love landscapes.
And so when it became time for me to do my graduate studies, I studied this emerging field of landscape ecology.
Landscape ecology concerns itself with how the stream and the meadow and the forest and the cliffs make habitats for plants and animals.
This experience and this training lead me to get a wonderful job with the Wildlife Conservation Society, which works to save wildlife and wild places all over the world.
And over the last decade, I traveled to over 40 countries to see jaguars and bears and elephants and tigers and rhinos.
But every time I would return from my trips I'd return back to New York City.
And on my weekends I would go up, just like all the other tourists, to the top of the Empire State Building, and I'd look down on this landscape, on these ecosystems, and I'd wonder, "How does this landscape work to make habitat for plants and animals?
How does it work to make habitat for animals like me?"
I'd go to Times Square and I'd look at the amazing ladies on the wall, and wonder why nobody is looking at the historical figures just behind them.
I'd go to Central Park and see the rolling topography of Central Park come up against the abrupt and sheer topography of midtown Manhattan.
I started reading about the history and the geography in New York City.
I read that New York City was the first mega-city, a city of 10 million people or more, in 1950.
I started seeing paintings like this.
For those of you who are from New York, this is 125th street under the West Side Highway.
(Laughter) It was once a beach. And this painting has John James Audubon, the painter, sitting on the rock.
And it's looking up on the wooded heights of Washington Heights to Jeffrey's Hook, where the George Washington Bridge goes across today.
Or this painting, from the 1740s, from Greenwich Village.
Those are two students at King's College -- later Columbia University -- sitting on a hill, overlooking a valley.
And so I'd go down to Greenwich Village and I'd look for this hill, and I couldn't find it. And I couldn't find that palm tree.
What's that palm tree doing there?
(Laughter) So, it was in the course of these investigations that I ran into a map.
And it's this map you see here.
It's held in a geographic information system which allows me to zoom in.
This map isn't from Hudson's time, but from the American Revolution, 170 years later, made by British military cartographers during the occupation of New York City.
And it's a remarkable map. It's in the National Archives here in Kew.
And it's 10 feet long and three and a half feet wide.
And if I zoom in to lower Manhattan you can see the extent of New York City as it was, right at the end of the American Revolution.
Here's Bowling Green. And here's Broadway.
And this is City Hall Park.
So the city basically extended to City Hall Park.
And just beyond it you can see features that have vanished, things that have disappeared.
This is the Collect Pond, which was the fresh water source for New York City for its first 200 years, and for the Native Americans for thousands of years before that.
You can see the Lispenard Meadows draining down through here, through what is TriBeCa now, and the beaches that come up from the Battery, all the way to 42nd St.
This map was made for military reasons.
They're mapping the roads, the buildings, these fortifications that they built.
But they're also mapping things of ecological interest, also military interest: the hills, the marshes, the streams.
This is Richmond Hill, and Minetta Water, which used to run its way through Greenwich Village.
Or the swamp at Gramercy Park, right here.
Or Murray Hill. And this is the Murrays' house on Murray Hill, 200 years ago.
Here is Times Square, the two streams that came together to make a wetland in Times Square, as it was at the end of the American Revolution.
So I saw this remarkable map in a book.
And I thought to myself, "You know, if I could georeference this map, if I could place this map in the grid of the city today, I could find these lost features of the city, in the block-by-block geography that people know, the geography of where people go to work, and where they go to live, and where they like to eat."
So, after some work we were able to georeference it, which allows us to put the modern streets on the city, and the buildings, and the open spaces, so that we can zoom in to where the Collect Pond is.
We can digitize the Collect Pond and the streams, and see where they actually are in the geography of the city today.
So this is fun for finding where things are relative to the old topography.
But I had another idea about this map.
If we take away the streets, and if we take away the buildings, and if we take away the open spaces, then we could take this map.
If we pull off the 18th century features we could drive it back in time.
We could drive it back to its ecological fundamentals: to the hills, to the streams, to the basic hydrology and shoreline, to the beaches, the basic aspects that make the ecological landscape.
Then, if we added maps like the geology, the bedrock geology, and the surface geology, what the glaciers leave, if we make the soil map, with the 17 soil classes, that are defined by the National Conservation Service, if we make a digital elevation model of the topography that tells us how high the hills were, then we can calculate the slopes.
We can calculate the aspect.
We can calculate the winter wind exposure -- so, which way the winter winds blow across the landscape.
The white areas on this map are the places protected from the winter winds.
We compiled all the information about where the Native Americans were, the Lenape.
And we built a probability map of where they might have been.
So, the red areas on this map indicate the places that are best for human sustainability on Manhattan, places that are close to water, places that are near the harbor to fish, places protected from the winter winds.
We know that there was a Lenape settlement down here by the Collect Pond.
And we knew that they planted a kind of horticulture, that they grew these beautiful gardens of corn, beans, and squash, the "Three Sisters" garden.
So, we built a model that explains where those fields might have been.
And the old fields, the successional fields that go.
And we might think of these as abandoned.
But, in fact, they're grassland habitats for grassland birds and plants.
And they have become successional shrub lands, and these then mix in to a map of all the ecological communities.
And it turns out that Manhattan had 55 different ecosystem types.
You can think of these as neighborhoods, as distinctive as TriBeCa and the Upper East Side and Inwood -- that these are the forest and the wetlands and the marine communities, the beaches.
And 55 is a lot. On a per-area basis, Manhattan had more ecological communities per acre than Yosemite does, than Yellowstone, than Amboseli.
It was really an extraordinary landscape that was capable of supporting an extraordinary biodiversity.
So, Act II: A Home Reconstructed.
So, we studied the fish and the frogs and the birds and the bees, the 85 different kinds of fish that were on Manhattan, the Heath hens, the species that aren't there anymore, the beavers on all the streams, the black bears, and the Native Americans, to study how they used and thought about their landscape.
We wanted to try and map these. And to do that what we did was we mapped their habitat needs.
Where do they get their food?
Where do they get their water? Where do they get their shelter?
Where do they get their reproductive resources?
To an ecologist, the intersection of these is habitat, but to most people, the intersection of these is their home.
So, we would read in field guides, the standard field guides that maybe you have on your shelves, you know, what beavers need is, "A slowly meandering stream with aspen trees and alders and willows, near the water." That's the best thing for a beaver.
So we just started making a list.
Here is the beaver. And here is the stream, and the aspen and the alder and the willow.
As if these were the maps that we would need to predict where you would find the beaver.
Or the bog turtle, needing wet meadows and insects and sunny places.
Or the bobcat, needing rabbits and beavers and den sites.
And rapidly we started to realize that beavers can be something that a bobcat needs.
But a beaver also needs things. And that having it on either side means that we can link it together, that we can create the network of the habitat relationships for these species.
Moreover, we realized that you can start out as being a beaver specialist, but you can look up what an aspen needs.
An aspen needs fire and dry soils.
And you can look at what a wet meadow needs.
And it need beavers to create the wetlands, and maybe some other things.
But you can also talk about sunny places.
So, what does a sunny place need? Not habitat per se.
But what are the conditions that make it possible?
Or fire. Or dry soils.
And that you can put these on a grid that's 1,000 columns long across the top and 1,000 rows down the other way.
And then we can visualize this data like a network, like a social network.
And this is the network of all the habitat relationships of all the plants and animals on Manhattan, and everything they needed, going back to the geology, going back to time and space at the very core of the web.
We call this the Muir Web. And if you zoom in on it it looks like this.
Each point is a different species or a different stream or a different soil type.
And those little gray lines are the connections that connect them together.
They are the connections that actually make nature resilient.
And the structure of this is what makes nature work, seen with all its parts.
We call these Muir Webs after the Scottish-American naturalist John Muir, who said, "When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find that it's bound fast by a thousand invisible cords that cannot be broken, to everything in the universe."
So then we took the Muir webs and we took them back to the maps.
So if we wanted to go between 85th and 86th, and Lex and Third, maybe there was a stream in that block.
And these would be the kind of trees that might have been there, and the flowers and the lichens and the mosses, the butterflies, the fish in the stream, the birds in the trees.
Maybe a timber rattlesnake lived there.
And perhaps a black bear walked by. And maybe Native Americans were there.
And then we took this data.
You can see this for yourself on our website.
You can zoom into any block on Manhattan, and see what might have been there 400 years ago.
And we used it to try and reveal a landscape here in Act III.
We used the tools they use in Hollywood to make these fantastic landscapes that we all see in the movies.
And we tried to use it to visualize Third Avenue.
So we would take the landscape and we would build up the topography.
We'd lay on top of that the soils and the waters, and illuminate the landscape.
We would lay on top of that the map of the ecological communities.
And feed into that the map of the species.
So that we would actually take a photograph, flying above Times Square, looking toward the Hudson River, waiting for Hudson to come.
Using this technology, we can make these fantastic georeferenced views.
We can basically take a picture out of any window on Manhattan and see what that landscape looked like 400 years ago.
This is the view from the East River, looking up Murray Hill at where the United Nations is today.
This is the view looking down the Hudson River, with Manhattan on the left, and New Jersey out on the right, looking out toward the Atlantic Ocean.
This is the view over Times Square, with the beaver pond there, looking out toward the east.
So we can see the Collect Pond, and Lispenard Marshes back behind.
We can see the fields that the Native Americans made.
And we can see this in the geography of the city today.
So when you're watching "Law and Order," and the lawyers walk up the steps they could have walked back down those steps of the New York Court House, right into the Collect Pond, 400 years ago.
So these images are the work of my friend and colleague, Mark Boyer, who is here in the audience today.
And I'd just like, if you would give him a hand, to call out for his fine work.
(Applause) There is such power in bringing science and visualization together, that we can create images like this, perhaps looking on either side of a looking glass.
And even though I've only had a brief time to speak, I hope you appreciate that Mannahatta was a very special place.
The place that you see here on the left side was interconnected. It was based on this diversity.
It had this resilience that is what we need in our modern world.
But I wouldn't have you think that I don't like the place on the right, which I quite do. I've come to love the city and its kind of diversity, and its resilience, and its dependence on density and how we're connected together.
In fact, that I see them as reflections of each other, much as Lewis Carroll did in "Through the Looking Glass."
We can compare these two and hold them in our minds at the same time, that they really are the same place, that there is no way that cities can escape from nature.
And I think this is what we're learning about building cities in the future.
So if you'll allow me a brief epilogue, not about the past, but about 400 years from now, what we're realizing is that cities are habitats for people, and need to supply what people need: a sense of home, food, water, shelter, reproductive resources, and a sense of meaning.
This is the particular additional habitat requirement of humanity.
And so many of the talks here at TED are about meaning, about bringing meaning to our lives in all kinds of different ways, through technology, through art, through science, so much so that I think we focus so much on that side of our lives, that we haven't given enough attention to the food and the water and the shelter, and what we need to raise the kids.
So, how can we envision the city of the future?
Well, what if we go to Madison Square Park, and we imagine it without all the cars, and bicycles instead and large forests, and streams instead of sewers and storm drains?
What if we imagined the Upper East Side with green roofs, and streams winding through the city, and windmills supplying the power we need?
Or if we imagine the New York City metropolitan area, currently home to 12 million people, but 12 million people in the future, perhaps living at the density of Manhattan, in only 36 percent of the area, with the areas in between covered by farmland, covered by wetlands, covered by the marshes we need.
This is the kind of future I think we need, is a future that has the same diversity and abundance and dynamism of Manhattan, but that learns from the sustainability of the past, of the ecology, the original ecology, of nature with all its parts.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
There's an ancient parable about a farmer who lost his horse.
And neighbors came over to say, "Oh, that's too bad."
And the farmer said, "Good or bad, hard to say."
Days later, the horse returns and brings with it seven wild horses.
And neighbors come over to say, "Oh, that's so good!"
And the farmer just shrugs and says, "Good or bad, hard to say."
The next day, the farmer's son rides one of the wild horses, is thrown off and breaks his leg.
And the neighbors say, "Oh, that's terrible luck."
And the farmer says, "Good or bad, hard to say."
Eventually, officers come knocking on people's doors, looking for men to draft for an army, and they see the farmer's son and his leg and they pass him by.
And neighbors say, "Ooh, that's great luck!"
And the farmer says, "Good or bad, hard to say."
I first heard this story 20 years ago, and I have since applied it 100 times.
Didn't get the job I wanted: good or bad, hard to say.
Got the job I wanted: good or bad, hard to say.
To me, the story is not about looking on the bright side or waiting to see how things turn out.
It's about how eager we can be to label a situation, to put concrete around it by judging it.
But reality is much more fluid, and good and bad are often incomplete stories that we tell ourselves.
The parable has been my warning that by gripping tightly to the story of good or bad, I close down my ability to truly see a situation.
I learn more when I proceed and loosen my grip and proceed openly with curiosity and wonder.
But seven years ago, when I was pregnant with my first child, I completely forgot this lesson.
I believed I knew wholeheartedly what was good.
When it came to having kids, I thought that good was some version of a superbaby, some ultrahealthy human who possessed not a single flaw and would practically wear a cape flying into her superhero future.
I took DHA pills to ensure that my baby had a super-high-functioning, supersmart brain, and I ate mostly organic food, and I trained for a medication-free labor, and I did many other things because I thought these things would help me make not just a good baby, but the best baby possible.
When my daughter Fiona was born, she weighed 4 pounds, 12 ounces, or 2.15 kilograms.
The pediatrician said there were only two possible explanations for her tiny size.
"Either," he said, "it's bad seed," "or it's bad soil."
And I wasn't so tired from labor to lose the thread of his logic: my newborn, according to the doctor, was a bad plant.
Eventually, I learned that my daughter had an ultra-rare chromosomal condition called Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
She was missing a chunk of her fourth chromosome.
And although my daughter was good -- she was alive, and she had brand new baby skin and the most aware onyx eyes -- I also learned that people with her syndrome have significant developmental delays and disabilities.
Some never learn to walk or talk.
I did not have the equanimity of the farmer.
The situation looked unequivocally bad to me.
But here's where the parable is so useful, because for weeks after her diagnosis, I felt gripped by despair, locked in the story that all of this was tragic.
Reality, though -- thankfully -- is much more fluid, and it has much more to teach.
As I started to get to know this mysterious person who was my kid, my fixed, tight story of tragedy loosened.
It turned out my girl loved reggae, and she would smirk when my husband would bounce her tiny body up and down to the rhythm.
Her onyx eyes eventually turned the most stunning Lake Tahoe blue, and she loved using them to gaze intently into other people's eyes.
At five months old, she could not hold her head up like other babies, but she could hold this deep, intent eye contact.
One friend said, "She's the most aware baby I've ever seen."
But where I saw the gift of her calm, attentive presence, an occupational therapist who came over to our house to work with Fiona saw a child who was neurologically dull.
This therapist was especially disappointed that Fiona wasn't rolling over yet, and so she told me we needed to wake her neurology up.
One day she leaned over my daughter's body, took her tiny shoulders, jostled her and said, "Wake up! Wake up!"
We had a few therapists visit our house that first year, and they usually focused on what they thought was bad about my kid.
I was really happy when Fiona started using her right hand to bully a dangling stuffed sheep, but the therapist was fixated on my child's left hand.
Fiona had a tendency not to use this hand very often, and she would cross the fingers on that hand.
So the therapist said we should devise a splint, which would rob my kid of the ability to actually use those fingers, but it would at least force them into some position that looked normal.
In that first year, I was starting to realize a few things.
One: ancient parables aside, my kid had some bad therapists.
(Laughter) Two: I had a choice.
Like a person offered to swallow a red pill or a blue pill, I could choose to see my daughter's differences as bad; I could strive toward the goal that her therapists called, "You'd never know."
They loved to pat themselves on the back when they could say about a kid, "You'd never know he was 'delayed' or 'autistic' or 'different.'" I could believe that the good path was the path that erased as many differences as possible.
Of course, this would have been a disastrous pursuit, because at the cellular level, my daughter had rare blueprints.
She wasn't designed to be like other people.
She would lead a rare life.
So, I had another choice: I could drop my story that neurological differences and developmental delays and disabilities were bad, which means I could also drop my story that a more able-bodied life was better.
I could release my cultural biases about what made a life good or bad and simply watch my daughter's life as it unfolded with openness and curiosity.
One afternoon she was lying on her back, and she arched her back on the carpet stuck her tongue out of the side of her mouth and managed to torque her body onto her belly.
Then she tipped over and rolled back onto her back, and once there, she managed to do it all over again, rolling and wiggling her 12-pound self under a coffee table.
At first, I thought she'd gotten stuck there, but then I saw her reaching for something that her eye had been on all along: a black electric cord.
She was a year old.
Other babies her age were for sure pulling up to stand and toddling around, some of them.
To some, my kid's situation looked bad: a one-year-old who could only roll.
But screw that.
My kid was enjoying the new, limber freedom of mobility.
I rejoiced.
Then again, what I watched that afternoon was a baby yanking on an electric cord, so you know, good or bad, hard to say.
(Laughter) I started seeing that when I released my grip about what made a life good or bad, I could watch my daughter's life unfold and see what it was.
It was beautiful, it was complicated, joyful, hard -- in other words: just another expression of the human experience.
Eventually, my family and I moved to a new state in America, and we got lucky with a brand-new batch of therapists.
They didn't focus on all that was wrong with my kid.
They didn't see her differences as problems to fix.
They acknowledged her limitations, but they also saw her strengths, and they celebrated her for who she was.
Their goal wasn't to make Fiona as normal as possible; their goal was simply to help her be as independent as possible so that she could fulfill her potential, however that looked for her.
But the culture at large does not take this open attitude about disabilities.
We call congenital differences "birth defects," as though human beings were objects on a factory line.
We might offer pitying expressions when we learn that a colleague had a baby with Down syndrome.
We hail a blockbuster film about a suicidal wheelchair user, despite the fact that actual wheelchair users tell us that stereotype is unfair and damaging.
And sometimes our medical institutions decide what lives are not worth living.
Such is the case with Amelia Rivera, a girl with my daughter's same syndrome.
In 2012, a famous American children's hospital initially denied Amelia the right to a lifesaving kidney transplant because, according to their form, as it said, she was "mentally retarded."
This is the way that the story of disabilities as bad manifests in a culture.
But there's a surprisingly insidious counterstory -- the story, especially, that people with intellectual disabilities are good because they are here to teach us something magical, or they are inherently angelic and always sweet.
You have heard this ableist trope before: the boy with Down syndrome who's one of God's special children, or the girl with the walker and the communication device who is a precious little angel.
This story rears its head in my daughter's life around Christmastime, when certain people get positively giddy at the thought of seeing her in angel's wings and a halo at the pageant.
The insinuation is that these people don't experience the sticky complexities of being human.
And although at times, especially as a baby, my daughter has, in fact, looked angelic, she has grown into the type of kid who does the rascally things that any other kid does, such as when she, at age four, shoved her two-year-old sister.
My girl deserves the right to annoy the hell out of you, like any other kid.
When we label a person tragic or angelic, bad or good, we rob them of their humanity, along with not only the messiness and complexity that that title brings, but the rights and dignities as well.
My girl does not exist to teach me things or any of us things, but she has indeed taught me: number one, how many mozzarella cheese sticks a 22-pound human being can consume in one day -- which is five, for the record; and two, the gift of questioning my culture's beliefs about what makes a life good and what makes life bad.
If you had told me six years ago that my daughter would sometimes use and iPad app to communicate, I might have thought that was sad.
But now I recall the first day I handed Fiona her iPad, loaded with a thousand words, each represented by a tiny little icon or little square on her iPad app.
