It's why I ask questions of art.
It is why I make exhibitions.
Now, this exhibition, as I said, 40 young artists done over the course of eight years, and for me it's about considering the implications.
It's considering the implications of what this generation has to say to the rest of us.
It's considering what it means for these artists to be both out in the world as their work travels, but in their communities as people who are seeing and thinking about the issues that face us.
It's also about thinking about the creative spirit and nurturing it, and imagining, particularly in urban America, about the nurturing of the spirit.
Now, where, perhaps, does this end up right now?
For me, it is about re-imagining this cultural discourse in an international context.
So the last iteration of this project has been called Flow, with the idea now of creating a real network of artists around the world; really looking, not so much from Harlem and out, but looking across, and Flow looked at artists all born on the continent of Africa.
And as many of us think about that continent and think about what if means to us all in the 21st century, I have begun that looking through artists, through artworks, and imagining what they can tell us about the future, what they tell us about our future, and what they create in their sense of offering us this great possibility of watching that continent emerge as part of our bigger dialogue.
So, what do I discover when I look at artworks?
What do I think about when I think about art?
I feel like the privilege I've had as a curator is not just the discovery of new works, the discovery of exciting works.
But, really, it has been what I've discovered about myself and what I can offer in the space of an exhibition, to talk about beauty, to talk about power, to talk about ourselves, and to talk and speak to each other.
That's what makes me get up every day and want to think about this generation of black artists and artists around the world.
Thank you. (Applause)
In the spirit of Jacques Cousteau, who said, "People protect what they love," I want to share with you today what I love most in the ocean, and that's the incredible number and variety of animals in it that make light.
My addiction began with this strange looking diving suit called Wasp; that's not an acronym -- just somebody thought it looked like the insect.
It was actually developed for use by the offshore oil industry for diving on oil rigs down to a depth of 2,000 feet.
Right after I completed my Ph.D., I was lucky enough to be included with a group of scientists that was using it for the first time as a tool for ocean exploration.
We trained in a tank in Port Hueneme, and then my first open ocean dive was in Santa Barbara Channel.
It was an evening dive.
I went down to a depth of 880 feet and turned out the lights.
And the reason I turned out the lights is because I knew I would see this phenomenon of animals making light called bioluminescence.
But I was totally unprepared for how much there was and how spectacular it was.
I saw chains of jellyfish called siphonophores that were longer than this room, pumping out so much light that I could read the dials and gauges inside the suit without a flashlight; and puffs and billows of what looked like luminous blue smoke; and explosions of sparks that would swirl up out of the thrusters -- just like when you throw a log on a campfire and the embers swirl up off the campfire, but these were icy, blue embers.
It was breathtaking.
Now, usually if people are familiar with bioluminescence at all, it's these guys; it's fireflies.
And there are a few other land-dwellers that can make light -- some insects, earthworms, fungi -- but in general, on land, it's really rare.
In the ocean, it's the rule rather than the exception.
If I go out in the open ocean environment, virtually anywhere in the world, and I drag a net from 3,000 feet to the surface, most of the animals -- in fact, in many places, 80 to 90 percent of the animals that I bring up in that net -- make light.
This makes for some pretty spectacular light shows.
Now I want to share with you a little video that I shot from a submersible.
I first developed this technique working from a little single-person submersible called Deep Rover and then adapted it for use on the Johnson Sea-Link, which you see here.
So, mounted in front of the observation sphere, there's a a three-foot diameter hoop with a screen stretched across it.
And inside the sphere with me is an intensified camera that's about as sensitive as a fully dark-adapted human eye, albeit a little fuzzy.
So you turn on the camera, turn out the lights.
That sparkle you're seeing is not luminescence, that's just electronic noise on these super intensified cameras.
You don't see luminescence until the submersible begins to move forward through the water, but as it does, animals bumping into the screen are stimulated to bioluminesce.
Now, when I was first doing this, all I was trying to do was count the numbers of sources.
I knew my forward speed, I knew the area, and so I could figure out how many hundreds of sources there were per cubic meter.
But I started to realize that I could actually identify animals by the type of flashes they produced.
And so, here, in the Gulf of Maine at 740 feet, I can name pretty much everything you're seeing there to the species level.
Like those big explosions, sparks, are from a little comb jelly, and there's krill and other kinds of crustaceans, and jellyfish.
There was another one of those comb jellies.
And so I've worked with computer image analysis engineers to develop automatic recognition systems that can identify these animals and then extract the XYZ coordinate of the initial impact point.
And we can then do the kinds of things that ecologists do on land, and do nearest neighbor distances.
But you don't always have to go down to the depths of the ocean to see a light show like this.
You can actually see it in surface waters.
This is some shot, by Dr. Mike Latz at Scripps Institution, of a dolphin swimming through bioluminescent plankton.
And this isn't someplace exotic like one of the bioluminescent bays in Puerto Rico, this was actually shot in San Diego Harbor.
And sometimes you can see it even closer than that, because the heads on ships -- that's toilets, for any land lovers that are listening -- are flushed with unfiltered seawater that often has bioluminescent plankton in it.
So, if you stagger into the head late at night and you're so toilet-hugging sick that you forget to turn on the light, you may think that you're having a religious experience. (Laughter) So, how does a living creature make light?
Well, that was the question that 19th century French physiologist Raphael Dubois, asked about this bioluminescent clam.
He ground it up and he managed to get out a couple of chemicals; one, the enzyme, he called luciferase; the substrate, he called luciferin after Lucifer the Lightbearer.
That terminology has stuck, but it doesn't actually refer to specific chemicals because these chemicals come in a lot of different shapes and forms.
In fact, most of the people studying bioluminescence today are focused on the chemistry, because these chemicals have proved so incredibly valuable for developing antibacterial agents, cancer fighting drugs, testing for the presence of life on Mars, detecting pollutants in our waters -- which is how we use it at ORCA.
In 2008, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded for work done on a molecule called green fluorescent protein that was isolated from the bioluminescent chemistry of a jellyfish, and it's been equated to the invention of the microscope, in terms of the impact that it has had on cell biology and genetic engineering.
Another thing all these molecules are telling us that, apparently, bioluminescence has evolved at least 40 times, maybe as many as 50 separate times in evolutionary history, which is a clear indication of how spectacularly important this trait is for survival.
So, what is it about bioluminescence that's so important to so many animals?
Well, for animals that are trying to avoid predators by staying in the darkness, light can still be very useful for the three basic things that animals have to do to survive: and that's find food, attract a mate and avoid being eaten.
So, for example, this fish has a built-in headlight behind its eye that it can use for finding food or attracting a mate.
And then when it's not using it, it actually can roll it down into its head just like the headlights on your Lamborghini.
This fish actually has high beams.
And this fish, which is one of my favorites, has three headlights on each side of its head.
Now, this one is blue, and that's the color of most bioluminescence in the ocean because evolution has selected for the color that travels farthest through seawater in order to optimize communication.
So, most animals make blue light, and most animals can only see blue light, but this fish is a really fascinating exception because it has two red light organs.
And I have no idea why there's two, and that's something I want to solve some day -- but not only can it see blue light, but it can see red light.
So it uses its red bioluminescence like a sniper's scope to be able to sneak up on animals that are blind to red light and be able to see them without being seen.
It's also got a little chin barbel here with a blue luminescent lure on it that it can use to attract prey from a long way off.
And a lot of animals will use their bioluminescence as a lure.
This is another one of my favorite fish.
This is a viperfish, and it's got a lure on the end of a long fishing rod that it arches in front of the toothy jaw that gives the viperfish its name.
The teeth on this fish are so long that if they closed inside the mouth of the fish, it would actually impale its own brain.
So instead, it slides in grooves on the outside of the head.
This is a Christmas tree of a fish; everything on this fish lights up, it's not just that lure.
It's got a built-in flashlight.
It's got these jewel-like light organs on its belly that it uses for a type of camouflage that obliterates its shadow, so when it's swimming around and there's a predator looking up from below, it makes itself disappear.
It's got light organs in the mouth, it's got light organs in every single scale, in the fins, in a mucus layer on the back and the belly, all used for different things -- some of which we know about, some of which we don't.
And we know a little bit more about bioluminescence thanks to Pixar, and I'm very grateful to Pixar for sharing my favorite topic with so many people.
I do wish, with their budget, that they might have spent just a tiny bit more money to pay a consulting fee to some poor, starving graduate student, who could have told them that those are the eyes of a fish that's been preserved in formalin.
These are the eyes of a living anglerfish.
So, she's got a lure that she sticks out in front of this living mousetrap of needle-sharp teeth in order to attract in some unsuspecting prey.
And this one has a lure with all kinds of little interesting threads coming off it.
Now we used to think that the different shape of the lure was to attract different types of prey, but then stomach content analyses on these fish done by scientists, or more likely their graduate students, have revealed that they all eat pretty much the same thing.
So, now we believe that the different shape of the lure is how the male recognizes the female in the anglerfish world, because many of these males are what are known as dwarf males.
This little guy has no visible means of self-support.
He has no lure for attracting food and no teeth for eating it when it gets there.
His only hope for existence on this planet is as a gigolo. (Laughter) He's got to find himself a babe and then he's got to latch on for life.
So this little guy has found himself this babe, and you will note that he's had the good sense to attach himself in a way that he doesn't actually have to look at her.
(Laughter) But he still knows a good thing when he sees it, and so he seals the relationship with an eternal kiss.
His flesh fuses with her flesh, her bloodstream grows into his body, and he becomes nothing more than a little sperm sac.
(Laughter) Well, this is a deep-sea version of Women's Lib.
She always knows where he is, and she doesn't have to be monogamous, because some of these females come up with multiple males attached.
So they can use it for finding food, for attracting mates.
They use it a lot for defense, many different ways.
A lot of them can release their luciferin or luferase in the water just the way a squid or an octopus will release an ink cloud.
This shrimp is actually spewing light out of its mouth like a fire breathing dragon in order to blind or distract this viperfish so that the shrimp can swim away into the darkness.
And there are a lot of different animals that can do this: There's jellyfish, there's squid, there's a whole lot of different crustaceans, there's even fish that can do this.
This fish is called the shining tubeshoulder because it actually has a tube on its shoulder that can squirt out light.
And I was luck enough to capture one of these when we were on a trawling expedition off the northwest coast of Africa for "Blue Planet," for the deep portion of "Blue Planet."
And we were using a special trawling net that we were able to bring these animals up alive.
So we captured one of these, and I brought it into the lab.
So I'm holding it, and I'm about to touch that tube on its shoulder, and when I do, you'll see bioluminescence coming out.
But to me, what's shocking is not just the amount of light, but the fact that it's not just luciferin and luciferase.
For this fish, it's actually whole cells with nuclei and membranes.
It's energetically very costly for this fish to do this, and we have no idea why it does it -- another one of these great mysteries that needs to be solved.
Now, another form of defense is something called a burglar alarm -- same reason you have a burglar alarm on your car; the honking horn and flashing lights are meant to attract the attention of, hopefully, the police that will come and take the burglar away -- when an animal's caught in the clutches of a predator, its only hope for escape may be to attract the attention of something bigger and nastier that will attack their attacker, thereby affording them a chance for escape.
This jellyfish, for example, has a spectacular bioluminescent display.
This is us chasing it in the submersible.
That's not luminescence, that's reflected light from the gonads.
We capture it in a very special device on the front of the submersible that allows us to bring it up in really pristine condition, bring it into the lab on the ship.
And then to generate the display you're about to see, all I did was touch it once per second on its nerve ring with a sharp pick that's sort of like the sharp tooth of a fish.
And once this display gets going, I'm not touching it anymore.
This is an unbelievable light show.
It's this pinwheel of light, and I've done calculations that show that this could be seen from as much as 300 feet away by a predator.
And I thought, "You know, that might actually make a pretty good lure."
Because one of the things that's frustrated me as a deep-sea explorer is how many animals there probably are in the ocean that we know nothing about because of the way we explore the ocean.
The primary way that we know about what lives in the ocean is we go out and drag nets behind ships.
And I defy you to name any other branch of science that still depends on hundreds of year-old technology.
The other primary way is we go down with submersibles and remote-operated vehicles.
I've made hundreds of dives in submersibles.
When I'm sitting in a submersible though, I know that I'm not unobtrusive at all -- I've got bright lights and noisy thrusters -- any animal with any sense is going to be long gone.
So, I've wanted for a long time to figure out a different way to explore.
And so, sometime ago, I got this idea for a camera system.
It's not exactly rocket science. We call this thing Eye-in-the-Sea.
And scientists have done this on land for years; we just use a color that the animals can't see and then a camera that can see that color.
You can't use infrared in the sea.
We use far-red light, but even that's a problem because it gets absorbed so quickly.
Made an intensified camera, wanted to make this electronic jellyfish.
Thing is, in science, you basically have to tell the funding agencies what you're going to discover before they'll give you the money.
And I didn't know what I was going to discover, so I couldn't get the funding for this.
So I kluged this together, I got the Harvey Mudd Engineering Clinic to actually do it as an undergraduate student project initially, and then I kluged funding from a whole bunch of different sources.
Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute gave me time with their ROV so that I could test it and we could figure out, you know, for example, which colors of red light we had to use so that we could see the animals, but they couldn't see us -- get the electronic jellyfish working.
And you can see just what a shoestring operation this really was, because we cast these 16 blue LEDs in epoxy and you can see in the epoxy mold that we used, the word Ziploc is still visible.
Needless to say, when it's kluged together like this, there were a lot of trials and tribulations getting this working.
But there came a moment when it all came together, and everything worked.
And, remarkably, that moment got caught on film by photographer Mark Richards, who happened to be there at the precise moment that we discovered that it all came together.
That's me on the left, my graduate student at the time, Erika Raymond, and Lee Fry, who was the engineer on the project.
And we have this photograph posted in our lab in a place of honor with the caption: "Engineer satisfying two women at once." (Laughter) And we were very, very happy.
So now we had a system that we could actually take to some place that was kind of like an oasis on the bottom of the ocean that might be patrolled by large predators.
And so, the place that we took it to was this place called a Brine Pool, which is in the northern part of the Gulf of Mexico.
It's a magical place.
And I know this footage isn't going to look like anything to you -- we had a crummy camera at the time -- but I was ecstatic.
We're at the edge of the Brine Pool, there's a fish that's swimming towards the camera.
It's clearly undisturbed by us.
And I had my window into the deep sea.
I, for the first time, could see what animals were doing down there when we weren't down there disturbing them in some way.
Four hours into the deployment, we had programmed the electronic jellyfish to come on for the first time.
Eighty-six seconds after it went into its pinwheel display, we recorded this: This is a squid, over six feet long, that is so new to science, it cannot be placed in any known scientific family.
I could not have asked for a better proof of concept.
And based on this, I went back to the National Science Foundation and said, "This is what we will discover."
And they gave me enough money to do it right, which has involved developing the world's first deep-sea webcam -- which has been installed in the Monterey Canyon for the past year -- and now, more recently, a modular form of this system, a much more mobile form that's a lot easier to launch and recover, that I hope can be used on Sylvia's "hope spots" to help explore and protect these areas, and, for me, learn more about the bioluminescence in these "hope spots."
So one of these take-home messages here is, there is still a lot to explore in the oceans.
And Sylvia has said that we are destroying the oceans before we even know what's in them, and she's right.
So if you ever, ever get an opportunity to take a dive in a submersible, say yes -- a thousand times, yes -- and please turn out the lights.
I promise, you'll love it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Good morning.
Happy to see so many fine folks out here and so many smiling faces.
I have a very peculiar background, attitude and approach to the real world because I am a conjurer.
Now, I prefer that term over magician, because if I were a magician, that would mean that I use spells and incantations and weird gestures in order to accomplish real magic.
No, I don't do that; I'm a conjurer, who is someone who pretends to be a real magician. (Laughter) Now, how do we go about that sort of thing?
We depend on the fact that audiences, such as yourselves, will make assumptions.
For example, when I walked up here and I took the microphone from the stand and switched it on, you assumed this was a microphone, which it is not.
(Laughter) As a matter of fact, this is something that about half of you, more than half of you will not be familiar with.
It's a beard trimmer, you see?
And it makes a very bad microphone; I've tried it many times. (Laughter) The other assumption that you made -- and this little lesson is to show you that you will make assumptions.
Not only that you can, but that you will when they are properly suggested to you.
You believe I'm looking at you.
Wrong. I'm not looking at you. I can't see you.
I know you're out there, they told me backstage, it's a full house and such.
I know you're there because I can hear you, but I can't see you because I normally wear glasses.
These are not glasses, these are empty frames. (Laughter) Quite empty frames.
Now why would a grown man appear before you wearing empty frames on his face?
To fool you, ladies and gentlemen, to deceive you, to show that you, too, can make assumptions.
Don't you ever forget that.
Now, I have to do something -- first of all, switch to real glasses so I can actually see you, which would probably be a convenience. I don't know.
I haven't had a good look. Well, it's not that great a convenience.
(Laughter) I have to do something now, which seems a little bit strange for a magician.
But I'm going to take some medication.
This is a full bottle of Calms Forte.
I'll explain that in just a moment.
Ignore the instructions, that's what the government has to put in there to confuse you, I'm sure.
I will take enough of these. Mm.
Indeed, the whole container.
Thirty-two tablets of Calms Forte.
Now that I've done that -- I'll explain it in a moment -- I must tell you that I am an actor.
I'm an actor who plays a specific part.
I play the part of a magician, a wizard, if you will, a real wizard.
If someone were to appear on this stage in front of me and actually claim to be an ancient prince of Denmark named Hamlet, you would be insulted and rightly so.
Why would a man assume that you would believe something bizarre like this?
But there exists out there a very large population of people who will tell you that they have psychic, magical powers that they can predict the future, that they can make contact with the deceased.
Oh, they also say they will sell you astrology or other fortunetelling methods.
Oh, they gladly sell you that, yes.
And they also say that they can give you perpetual motion machines and free energy systems.
They claim to be psychics, or sensitives, whatever they can.
But the one thing that has made a big comeback just recently is this business of speaking with the dead.
Now, to my innocent mind, dead implies incapable of communicating. (Laughter) You might agree with me on that.
But these people, they tend to tell you that not only can they communicate with the dead -- "Hi, there" -- but they can hear the dead as well, and they can relay this information back to the living.
I wonder if that's true.
I don't think so, because this subculture of people use exactly the same gimmicks that we magicians do, exactly the same -- the same physical methods, the same psychological methods -- and they effectively and profoundly deceive millions of people around the earth, to their detriment.
They deceive these people, costs them a lot of money, cost them a lot of emotional anguish.
Billions of dollars are spent every year, all over the globe, on these charlatans.
Now, I have two questions I would like to ask these people if I had the opportunity to do so.
First question: If I want to ask them to call up -- because they do hear them through the ear.
They listen to the spirits like this -- I'm going to ask you to call up the ghost of my grandmother because, when she died, she had the family will, and she secreted it someplace. We don't know where it is, so we ask Granny, "Where is the will, Granny?"
What does Granny say? She says, "I'm in heaven and it's wonderful.
I'm here with all my old friends, my deceased friends, and my family and all the puppy dogs and the kittens that I used to have when I was a little girl.
And I love you, and I'll always be with you.
Good bye."
And she didn't answer the damn question!
Where is the will?
Now, she could easily have said, "Oh, it's in the library on the second shelf, behind the encyclopedia," but she doesn't say that. No, she doesn't.
She doesn't bring any useful information to us.
We paid a lot of money for that information, be we didn't get it.
The second question that I'd like to ask, rather simple: Suppose I ask them to contact the spirit of my deceased father-in-law, as an example.
Why do they insist on saying -- remember, they speak into this ear -- why do they say, "My name starts with J or M?"
Is this a hunting game?
Hunting and fishing? What is it?
Is it 20 questions? No, it's more like 120 questions.
But it is a cruel, vicious, absolutely conscienceless -- I'll be all right, keep your seats (Laughter) -- game that these people play.
And they take advantage of the innocent, the naive, the grieving, the needy people out there.
Now, this is a process that is called cold reading.
There's one fellow out there, Van Praagh is his name, James Van Praagh.
He's one of the big practitioners of this sort of thing.
John Edward, Sylvia Browne and Rosemary Altea, they are other operators.
There are hundreds of them all over the earth, but in this country, James Van Praagh is very big.
And what does he do? He likes to tell you how the deceased got deceased, the people he's talking to through his ear, you see?
So what he says is, very often, is like this: he says, "He tells me, he tells me, before he passed, that he had trouble breathing."
Folks, that's what dying is all about!
(Laughter) You stop breathing, and then you're dead.
It's that simple.
And that's the kind of information they're going to bring back to you?
I don't think so.
Now, these people will make guesses, they'll say things like, "Why am I getting electricity?
He's saying to me, 'Electricity.' Was he an electrician?" "No."
"Did he ever have an electric razor?" "No."
It was a game of hunting questions like this.
This is what they go through.
Now, folks often ask us at the James Randi Educational Foundation, they call me, they say, "Why are you so concerned about this, Mr. Randi?
Isn't it just a lot of fun?"
No, it is not fun. It is a cruel farce.
Now, it may bring a certain amount of comfort, but that comfort lasts only about 20 minutes or so.
And then the people look in the mirror, and they say, I just paid a lot of money for that reading.
And what did she say to me? 'I love you!'" They always say that.
They don't get any information, they don't get any value for what they spend.
Now, Sylvia Browne is the big operator.
We call her "The Talons."
Sylvia Browne -- thank you -- Sylvia Browne is the big operator in this field at this very moment.
Now, Sylvia Browne -- just to show you -- she actually gets 700 dollars for a 20 minute reading over the telephone, she doesn't even go there in person, and you have to wait up to two years because she's booked ahead that amount of time.
You pay by credit card or whatever, and then she will call you sometime in the next two years.
You can tell it's her. "Hello, this is Sylvia Browne."
That's her, you can tell right away.
Now, Montel Williams is an intelligent man.
We all know who he is on television.
He's well educated, he's smart, he knows what Sylvia Browne is doing but he doesn't give a damn.
He just doesn't care.
Because, the bottom line is, the sponsors love it, and he will expose her to television publicity all the time.
Now, what does Sylvia Browne give you for that 700 dollars?
She gives you the names of your guardian angels, that's first.
Now, without that, how could we possibly function? (Laughter) She gives you the names of previous lives, who you were in previous lives.
Duh.
It turns out that the women that she gives readings for were all Babylonian princesses, or something like that.
And the men were all Grecian warriors fighting with Agamemnon.
Nothing is ever said about a 14 year-old bootblack in the streets of London who died of consumption.
He isn't worth bringing back, obviously.
And the strange thing -- folks, you may have noticed this too.
You see these folks on television -- they never call anybody back from hell. (Laughter) Everyone comes back from heaven, but never from hell.
If they call back any of my friends, they're not going to... Well, you see the story.
(Laughter) Now, Sylvia Browne is an exception, an exception in one way, because the James Randi Educational Foundation, my foundation, offers a one million dollar prize in negotiable bonds.
Very simply won.
All you have to do is prove any paranormal, occult or supernatural event or power of any kind under proper observing conditions.
It's very easy, win the million dollars.
Sylvia Browne is an exception in that she's the only professional psychic in the whole world that has accepted our challenge.
She did this on the "Larry King Live" show on CNN six and a half years ago.
And we haven't heard from her since. Strange.
She said that, first of all, that she didn't know how to contact me.
Duh.
A professional psychic who speaks to dead people, she can't reach me?
(Laughter) I'm alive, you may have noticed.
Well, pretty well anyway.
She couldn't reach me. Now she says she doesn't want to reach me because I'm a godless person.
All the more reason to take the million dollars, wouldn't you think, Sylvia?
Now these people need to be stopped, seriously now.
They need to be stopped because this is a cruel farce.
We get people coming to the foundation all the time.
They're ruined financially and emotionally because they've given their money and their faith to these people.
Now, I popped some pills earlier.
I have to explain that to you.
Homeopathy, let's find out what that's all about.
Hmm. You've heard of it.
It's an alternative form of healing, right?
Homeopathy actually consists -- and that's what this is.
This is Calms Forte, 32 caplets of sleeping pills! I forgot to tell you that.
I just ingested six and a half days worth of sleeping pills.
(Laughter) Six and a half days, that certainly is a fatal dose.
It says right on the back here, "In case of overdose, contact your poison control center immediately," and it gives an 800 number.
Keep your seats -- it's going to be okay.
I don't really need it because I've been doing this stunt for audiences all over the world for the last eight or 10 years, taking fatal doses of homeopathic sleeping pills.
Why don't they affect me?
(Laughter) (Applause) The answer may surprise you.
What is homeopathy?
It's taking a medicine that really works and diluting it down well beyond Avogadro's limit.
Diluting it down to the point where there's none of it left. (Laughter) Now folks, this is not just a metaphor I'm going to give you now, it's true.
It's exactly equivalent to taking one 325 milligram aspirin tablet, throwing it into the middle of Lake Tahoe, and then stirring it up, obviously with a very big stick, and waiting two years or so until the solution is homogeneous.
Then, when you get a headache, you take a sip of this water, and -- voila! -- it is gone.
(Laughter) Now that is true. That is what homeopathy is all about.
And another claim that they make -- you'll love this one -- the more dilute the medicine is, they say, the more powerful it is.
Now wait a minute, we heard about a guy in Florida.
The poor man, he was on homeopathic medicine.
He died of an overdose.
He forgot to take his pill.
(Laughter) Work on it. Work on it.
It's a ridiculous thing. It is absolutely ridiculous.
I don't know what we're doing, believing in all this nonsense over all these years.
Now, let me tell you, The James Randi Educational Foundation is waving this very big carrot, but I must say, the fact that nobody has taken us up on this offer doesn't mean that the powers don't exist.
They might, some place out there.
Maybe these people are just independently wealthy.
Well, with Sylvia Browne I would think so.
You know, 700 dollars for a 20 minute reading over the telephone -- that's more than lawyers make!
I mean that's a fabulous amount of money.
These people don't need the million dollars perhaps, but wouldn't you think they'd like to take it just to make me look silly?
Just to get rid of this godless person out there that Sylvia Browne talks about all the time?
I think that something needs to be done about this.
We really would love to have suggestions from you folks on how to contact federal, state and local authorities to get them to do something.
If you find out -- now I understand.
We've seen people, even today, speaking to us about AIDS epidemics and starving kids around the world and impure water supplies that people have to suffer with.
Those are very important, critically important to us.
And we must do something about those problems.
But at the same time, as Arthur C. Clarke said, The rotting of the human mind, the business of believing in the paranormal and the occult and the supernatural -- all of this total nonsense, this medieval thinking -- I think something should be done about that, and it all lies in education.
Largely, it's the media who are to blame for this sort of thing.
They shamelessly promote all kinds of nonsense of this sort because it pleases the sponsors.
It's the bottom line, the dollar line.
That's what they're looking at.
We really must do something about this.
I'm willing to take your suggestions, and I'm willing to have you tune in to our webpage.
It's www.randi.org.
Go in there and look at the archives, and you will begin to understand much more of what I've been talking about today.
You will see the records that we have.
There's nothing like sitting in that library and having a family appear there and say that Mum gave away all the family fortune.
She cashed in the CDs, she gave away the stocks and the certificates.
That's really sad to hear, and it hasn't helped them one bit, hasn't solved any of their problems.
Yes, there could be a rotting of the American mind, and of the minds all the way around the earth, if we don't start to think sensibly about these things.
Now, we've offered this carrot, as I say, we've dangled the carrot.
We're waiting for the psychics to come forth and snap at it.
Oh, we get lots of them, hundreds of them every year come by.
These are dowsers and people who think that they can talk to the dead as well, but they're amateurs; they don't know how to evaluate their own so-called powers.
The professionals never come near us, except in that case of Sylvia Browne that I told you about a moment ago.
She did accept and then backed away.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'm James Randi, and I'm waiting.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The greatest irony in global health is that the poorest countries carry the largest disease burden.
If we resize the countries of the globe in proportion to the subject of interest, we see that Sub-Saharan Africa is the worst hit region by HIV/AIDS.
This is the most devastating epidemic of our time.
We also see that this region has the least capability in terms of dealing with the disease.
There are very few doctors and, quite frankly, these countries do not have the resources that are needed to cope with such epidemics.
So what the Western countries, developed countries, have generously done is they have proposed to provide free drugs to all people in Third World countries who actually can't afford these medications.
And this has already saved millions of lives, and it has prevented entire economies from capsizing in Sub-Saharan Africa.
But there is a fundamental problem that is killing the efforts in fighting this disease, because if you keep throwing drugs out at people who don't have diagnostic services, you end up creating a problem of drug resistance.
This is already beginning to happen in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The problem is that, what begins as a tragedy in the Third World could easily become a global problem.
And the last thing we want to see is drug-resistant strains of HIV popping up all over the world, because it will make treatment more expensive and it could also restore the pre-ARV carnage of HIV/AIDS.
I experienced this firsthand as a high school student in Uganda.
This was in the 90s during the peak of the HIV epidemic, before there were any ARVs in Sub-Saharan Africa.
And during that time, I actually lost more relatives, as well as the teachers who taught me, to HIV/AIDS.
So this became one of the driving passions of my life, to help find real solutions that could address these kinds of problems.
We all know about the miracle of miniaturization.
Back in the day, computers used to fill this entire room, and people actually used to work inside the computers.
But what electronic miniaturization has done is that it has allowed people to shrink technology into a cell phone.
And I'm sure everyone here enjoys cell phones that can actually be used in the remote areas of the world, in the Third World countries.
The good news is that the same technology that allowed miniaturization of electronics is now allowing us to miniaturize biological laboratories.
So, right now, we can actually miniaturize biological and chemistry laboratories onto microfluidic chips.
I was very lucky to come to the US right after high school, and was able to work on this technology and develop some devices.
This is a microfluidic chip that I developed.
A close look at how the technology works: These are channels that are about the size of a human hair -- so you have integrated valves, pumps, mixers and injectors -- so you can fit entire diagnostic experiments onto a microfluidic system.
So what I plan to do with this technology is to actually take the current state of the technology and build an HIV kit in a microfluidic system.
So, with one microfluidic chip, which is the size of an iPhone, you can actually diagnose 100 patients at the same time.
For each patient, we will be able to do up to 100 different viral loads per patient.
And this is only done in four hours, 50 times faster than the current state of the art, at a cost that will be five to 500 times cheaper than the current options.
So this will allow us to create personalized medicines in the Third World at a cost that is actually achievable and make the world a safer place.
I invite your interest as well as your involvement in driving this vision to a point of practical reality.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Several years ago here at TED, Peter Skillman introduced a design challenge called the marshmallow challenge.
And the idea's pretty simple: Teams of four have to build the tallest free-standing structure out of 20 sticks of spaghetti, one yard of tape, one yard of string and a marshmallow.
The marshmallow has to be on top.
And, though it seems really simple, it's actually pretty hard because it forces people to collaborate very quickly.
And so, I thought this was an interesting idea, and I incorporated it into a design workshop.
And it was a huge success.
And since then, I've conducted about 70 design workshops across the world with students and designers and architects, even the CTOs of the Fortune 50, and there's something about this exercise that reveals very deep lessons about the nature of collaboration, and I'd like to share some of them with you.
So, normally, most people begin by orienting themselves to the task.
They talk about it, they figure out what it's going to look like, they jockey for power.
Then they spend some time planning, organizing, they sketch and they lay out spaghetti.
They spend the majority of their time assembling the sticks into ever-growing structures.
And then finally, just as they're running out of time, someone takes out the marshmallow, and then they gingerly put it on top, and then they stand back, and -- ta-da! -- they admire their work.
But what really happens, most of the time, is that the "ta-da" turns into an "uh-oh," because the weight of the marshmallow causes the entire structure to buckle and to collapse.
So there are a number of people who have a lot more "uh-oh" moments than others, and among the worst are recent graduates of business school.
(Laughter) They lie, they cheat, they get distracted and they produce really lame structures.
And of course there are teams that have a lot more "ta-da" structures, and among the best are recent graduates of kindergarten.
(Laughter) And it's pretty amazing.
As Peter tells us, not only do they produce the tallest structures, but they're the most interesting structures of them all.
So the question you want to ask is: How come? Why? What is it about them?
And Peter likes to say that none of the kids spend any time trying to be CEO of Spaghetti, Inc. Right?
They don't spend time jockeying for power.
But there's another reason as well.
And the reason is that business students are trained to find the single right plan, right?
And then they execute on it.
And then what happens is, when they put the marshmallow on the top, they run out of time and what happens?
It's a crisis.
Sound familiar? Right.
What kindergarteners do differently is that they start with the marshmallow, and they build prototypes, successive prototypes, always keeping the marshmallow on top, so they have multiple times to fix when they build prototypes along the way.
Designers recognize this type of collaboration as the essence of the iterative process.
And with each version, kids get instant feedback about what works and what doesn't work.
So the capacity to play in prototype is really essential, but let's look at how different teams perform.
So the average for most people is around 20 inches; business schools students, about half of that; lawyers, a little better, but not much better than that, kindergarteners, better than most adults.
Who does the very best?
Architects and engineers, thankfully.
(Laughter) Thirty-nine inches is the tallest structure I've seen.
And why is it? Because they understand triangles and self-reinforcing geometrical patterns are the key to building stable structures.
So CEOs, a little bit better than average, but here's where it gets interesting.
If you put you put an executive admin. on the team, they get significantly better.
(Laughter) It's incredible. You know, you look around, you go, "Oh, that team's going to win."
You can just tell beforehand. And why is that?
Because they have special skills of facilitation.
They manage the process, they understand the process.
And any team who manages and pays close attention to work will significantly improve the team's performance.
Specialized skills and facilitation skills are the combination that leads to strong success.
If you have 10 teams that typically perform, you'll get maybe six or so that have standing structures.
And I tried something interesting.
I thought, let's up the ante, once.
So I offered a 10,000 dollar prize of software to the winning team.
So what do you think happened to these design students?
What was the result?
Here's what happened: Not one team had a standing structure.
If anyone had built, say, a one inch structure, they would have taken home the prize.
So, isn't that interesting? That high stakes have a strong impact.
We did the exercise again with the same students.
What do you think happened then?
So now they understand the value of prototyping.
So the same team went from being the very worst to being among the very best.
They produced the tallest structures in the least amount of time.
So there's deep lessons for us about the nature of incentives and success.
So, you might ask: Why would anyone actually spend time writing a marshmallow challenge?
And the reason is, I help create digital tools and processes to help teams build cars and video games and visual effects.
And what the marshmallow challenge does is it helps them identify the hidden assumptions.
Because, frankly, every project has its own marshmallow, doesn't it?
The challenge provides a shared experience, a common language, a common stance to build the right prototype.
And so, this is the value of the experience, of this so simple exercise.
And those of you who are interested may want to go to MarshmallowChallenge.com.
It's a blog that you can look at how to build the marshmallows.
There's step-by-step instructions on this.
There are crazy examples from around the world of how people tweak and adjust the system.
There's world records that are on this as well.
And the fundamental lesson, I believe, is that design truly is a contact sport.
It demands that we bring all of our senses to the task, and that we apply the very best of our thinking, our feeling and our doing to the challenge that we have at hand.
And sometimes, a little prototype of this experience is all that it takes to turn us from an "uh-oh" moment to a "ta-da" moment.
And that can make a big difference.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
One of the things that defines a TEDster is you've taken your passion, and you've turned it into stewardship.
You actually put action to the issues you care about.
But what you're going to find eventually is you may need to actually get elected officials to help you out.
So, how do you do that?
One of the things I should probably tell you is, I worked for the Discovery Channel early in my career, and that sort of warped my framework.
So, when you start to think about politicians, you've got to realize these are strange creatures.
Other than the fact that they can't tell directions, and they have very strange breeding habits, how do you actually work with these things? (Laughter) What we need to understand is: What drives the political creature?
And there are two things that are primary in a politician's heart: One is reputation and influence.
These are the primary tools by which a politician can do his job.
The second one -- unlike most animals, which is survival of the species -- this is preservation of self.
Now you may think it's money, but that's actually sort of a proxy to what I can do to preserve myself.
Now, the challenge with you moving your issue forward is these animals are getting broadcast to all the time.
So, what doesn't work, in terms of getting your issue to be important?
You can send them an email.
Well, unfortunately, I've got so many Viagra ads coming at me, your email is lost.
It doesn't matter, it's spam.
How about you get on the phone?
Well, chances are I've got a droid who's picking up the phone, "Yes, they called, and they said they didn't like it."
That doesn't move.
Face to face would work, but it's hard to set it up.
It's hard to get the context and actually get the communication to work.
Yes, contributions actually do make a difference and they set a context for having a conversation, but it takes some time to build up.
So what actually works?
And the answer is rather strange.
It's a letter.
We live in a digital world, but we're fairly analog creatures.
Letters actually work.
Even the top dog himself takes time every day to read 10 letters that are picked out by staff.
I can tell you that every official that I've ever worked with will tell you about the letters they get and what they mean.
So, how are you going to write your letter?
First of all, you're going to pick up an analog device: a pen.
I know these are tough, and you may have a hard time getting your hand bent around it, (Laughter) but this is actually critical.
And it is critical that you actually handwrite your letter.
It is so novel to see this, that somebody actually picked up an analog device and has written to me.
Second of all, I'm going to recommend that you get into a proactive stance and write to your elected officials at least once a month.
Here's my promise to you: If you are consistent and do this, within three months the elected official will start calling you when that issue comes up and say, "What do you think?"
Now, I'm going to give you a four paragraph format to work with.
Now, when you approach these animals, you need to understand there's a dangerous end to them, and you also need to approach them with some level of respect and a little bit of wariness.
So in paragraph number one, what I'm going to tell you to do is very simply this: You appreciate them.
You may not appreciate the person, you may not appreciate anything else, but maybe you appreciate the fact that they've got a tough gig.
When animals are going to make a point, they make the point.
They don't spend a lot of time dicking around.
So, here you go. (Laughter) Paragraph number two: You may actually have to just get very blunt and say what's really on your mind.
When you do this, don't attack people; you attack tactics.
Ad hominem attacks will get you nowhere.
Paragraph number three: When animals are attacked or cornered, they will fight to the death, so you have to give them an exit.
Most of the time, if they have an exit strategy, they should take it.
"Obviously, you're intelligent.
If you had the right information, you would have done the right thing." (Laughter) Lastly, you want to be the nurturing agent.
You're the safe place to come in to.
So, in paragraph number four, you're going to tell people, "If no one is providing you with this information, let me help." (Laughter) Animals do displays. They do two things: They warn you or they try to attract you and say, "We need to mate."
You're going to do that by the way you sign your letter.
You do a number of things: you're a vice president, you volunteer, you do something else.
Why is is this important?
Because this establishes the two primary criteria for the political creature: that you have influence in a large sphere, and that my preservation depends on you.
Here is one very quick hack, especially for the feds in the audience.
Here's how you mail your letter.
First of all, you send the original to the district office.
So, you send the copy to the main office.
If they follow protocol, they'll pick up the phone and say, "Hey, do you have the original?"
Then some droid in the back puts the name on a tickler and says, "Oh, this is an important letter."
And you actually get into the folder that the elected official actually has to read.
So, what your letter means: I've got to tell you, we are all in a party, and political officials are the pinatas.
(Laughter) We are harangued, lectured to, sold, marketed, but a letter is actually one of the few times that we have honest communication.
I got this letter when I was first elected, and I still carry it to every council meeting I go to.
This is an opportunity at real dialogue, and if you have stewardship and want to communicate, that dialogue is incredibly powerful.
So when you do that, here's what I can promise: You're going to be the 800 pound gorilla in the forest.
Get writing.
(Applause)
As someone who has spent his entire career trying to be invisible standing in front of an audience is a cross between an out-of-body experience and a deer caught in the headlights, so please forgive me for violating one of the TED commandments by relying on words on paper, and I only hope I'm not struck by lightning bolts before I'm done.
I'd like to begin by talking about some of the ideas that motivated me to become a documentary photographer.
I was a student in the '60s, a time of social upheaval and questioning, and on a personal level, an awakening sense of idealism.
The war in Vietnam was raging; the Civil Rights Movement was under way; and pictures had a powerful influence on me.
Our political and military leaders were telling us one thing, and photographers were telling us another.
I believed the photographers, and so did millions of other Americans.
Their images fueled resistance to the war and to racism.
They not only recorded history; they helped change the course of history.
Their pictures became part of our collective consciousness and, as consciousness evolved into a shared sense of conscience, change became not only possible, but inevitable.
I saw that the free flow of information represented by journalism, specifically visual journalism, can bring into focus both the benefits and the cost of political policies.
It can give credit to sound decision-making, adding momentum to success.
In the face of poor political judgment or political inaction, it becomes a kind of intervention, assessing the damage and asking us to reassess our behavior.
It puts a human face on issues which from afar can appear abstract or ideological or monumental in their global impact.
What happens at ground level, far from the halls of power, happens to ordinary citizens one by one.
And I understood that documentary photography has the ability to interpret events from their point of view.
It gives a voice to those who otherwise would not have a voice.
And as a reaction, it stimulates public opinion and gives impetus to public debate, thereby preventing the interested parties from totally controlling the agenda, much as they would like to.
Coming of age in those days made real the concept that the free flow of information is absolutely vital for a free and dynamic society to function properly.
The press is certainly a business, and in order to survive it must be a successful business, but the right balance must be found between marketing considerations and journalistic responsibility.
Society's problems can't be solved until they're identified.
On a higher plane, the press is a service industry, and the service it provides is awareness.
Every story does not have to sell something.
There's also a time to give.
That was a tradition I wanted to follow.
Seeing the war created such incredibly high stakes for everyone involved and that visual journalism could actually become a factor in conflict resolution -- I wanted to be a photographer in order to be a war photographer.
But I was driven by an inherent sense that a picture that revealed the true face of war would almost by definition be an anti-war photograph.
I'd like to take you on a visual journey through some of the events and issues I've been involved in over the past 25 years.
In 1981, I went to Northern Ireland.
10 IRA prisoners were in the process of starving themselves to death in protest against conditions in jail.
The reaction on the streets was violent confrontation.
I saw that the front lines of contemporary wars are not on isolated battlefields, but right where people live.
During the early '80s, I spent a lot of time in Central America, which was engulfed by civil wars that straddled the ideological divide of the Cold War.
In Guatemala, the central government -- controlled by a oligarchy of European decent -- was waging a scorched Earth campaign against an indigenous rebellion, and I saw an image that reflected the history of Latin America: conquest through a combination of the Bible and the sword.
An anti-Sandinista guerrilla was mortally wounded as Commander Zero attacked a town in Southern Nicaragua.
A destroyed tank belonging to Somoza's national guard was left as a monument in a park in Managua, and was transformed by the energy and spirit of a child.
At the same time, a civil war was taking place in El Salvador, and again, the civilian population was caught up in the conflict.
I've been covering the Palestinian-Israeli conflict since 1981.
This is a moment from the beginning of the second intifada, in 2000, when it was still stones and Molotovs against an army.
In 2001, the uprising escalated into an armed conflict, and one of the major incidents was the destruction of the Palestinian refugee camp in the West Bank town of Jenin.
Without the political will to find common ground, the continual friction of tactic and counter-tactic only creates suspicion and hatred and vengeance, and perpetuates the cycle of violence.
In the '90s, after the breakup of the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia fractured along ethnic fault lines, and civil war broke out between Bosnia, Croatia and Serbia.
This is a scene of house-to-house fighting in Mostar, neighbor against neighbor.
A bedroom, the place where people share intimacy, where life itself is conceived, became a battlefield.
A mosque in northern Bosnia was destroyed by Serbian artillery and was used as a makeshift morgue.
Dead Serbian soldiers were collected after a battle and used as barter for the return of prisoners or Bosnian soldiers killed in action.
This was once a park.
The Bosnian soldier who guided me told me that all of his friends were there now.
At the same time in South Africa, after Nelson Mandela had been released from prison, the black population commenced the final phase of liberation from apartheid.
One of the things I had to learn as a journalist was what to do with my anger.
I had to use it, channel its energy, turn it into something that would clarify my vision, instead of clouding it.
In Transkei, I witnessed a rite of passage into manhood, of the Xhosa tribe.
Teenage boys lived in isolation, their bodies covered with white clay.
After several weeks, they washed off the white and took on the full responsibilities of men.
It was a very old ritual that seemed symbolic of the political struggle that was changing the face of South Africa.
Children in Soweto playing on a trampoline.
Elsewhere in Africa there was famine.
In Somalia, the central government collapsed and clan warfare broke out.
Farmers were driven off their land, and crops and livestock were destroyed or stolen.
Starvation was being used as a weapon of mass destruction -- primitive but extremely effective.
Hundreds of thousands of people were exterminated, slowly and painfully.
The international community responded with massive humanitarian relief, and hundreds of thousands of more lives were saved.
American troops were sent to protect the relief shipments, but they were eventually drawn into the conflict, and after the tragic battle in Mogadishu, they were withdrawn.
In southern Sudan, another civil war saw similar use of starvation as a means of genocide.
Again, international NGOs, united under the umbrella of the U.N., staged a massive relief operation and thousands of lives were saved.
I'm a witness, and I want my testimony to be honest and uncensored.
I also want it to be powerful and eloquent, and to do as much justice as possible to the experience of the people I'm photographing.
This man was in an NGO feeding center, being helped as much as he could be helped.
He literally had nothing. He was a virtual skeleton, yet he could still summon the courage and the will to move.
He had not given up, and if he didn't give up, how could anyone in the outside world ever dream of losing hope?
In 1994, after three months of covering the South African election, I saw the inauguration of Nelson Mandela, and it was the most uplifting thing I've ever seen.
It exemplified the best that humanity has to offer.
The next day I left for Rwanda, and it was like taking the express elevator to hell.
This man had just been liberated from a Hutu death camp.
He allowed me to photograph him for quite a long time, and he even turned his face toward the light, as if he wanted me to see him better.
I think he knew what the scars on his face would say to the rest of the world.
This time, maybe confused or discouraged by the military disaster in Somalia, the international community remained silent, and somewhere around 800,000 people were slaughtered by their own countrymen -- sometimes their own neighbors -- using farm implements as weapons.
Perhaps because a lesson had been learned by the weak response to the war in Bosnia and the failure in Rwanda, when Serbia attacked Kosovo, international action was taken much more decisively.
NATO forces went in, and the Serbian army withdrew.
Ethnic Albanians had been murdered, their farms destroyed and a huge number of people forcibly deported.
They were received in refugee camps set up by NGOs in Albania and Macedonia.
The imprint of a man who had been burned inside his own home.
The image reminded me of a cave painting, and echoed how primitive we still are in so many ways.
Between 1995 and '96, I covered the first two wars in Chechnya from inside Grozny.
This is a Chechen rebel on the front line against the Russian army.
The Russians bombarded Grozny constantly for weeks, killing mainly the civilians who were still trapped inside.
I found a boy from the local orphanage wandering around the front line.
My work has evolved from being concerned mainly with war to a focus on critical social issues as well.
After the fall of Ceausescu, I went to Romania and discovered a kind of gulag of children, where thousands of orphans were being kept in medieval conditions.
Ceausescu had imposed a quota on the number of children to be produced by each family, thereby making women's bodies an instrument of state economic policy.
Children who couldn't be supported by their families were raised in government orphanages.
Children with birth defects were labeled incurables, and confined for life to inhuman conditions.
As reports began to surface, again international aid went in.
Going deeper into the legacy of the Eastern European regimes, I worked for several months on a story about the effects of industrial pollution, where there had been no regard for the environment or the health of either workers or the general population.
An aluminum factory in Czechoslovakia was filled with carcinogenic smoke and dust, and four out of five workers came down with cancer.
After the fall of Suharto in Indonesia, I began to explore conditions of poverty in a country that was on its way towards modernization.
I spent a good deal of time with a man who lived with his family on a railway embankment and had lost an arm and a leg in a train accident.
When the story was published, unsolicited donations poured in.
A trust fund was established, and the family now lives in a house in the countryside and all their basic necessities are taken care of.
It was a story that wasn't trying to sell anything.
Journalism had provided a channel for people's natural sense of generosity, and the readers responded.
I met a band of homeless children who'd come to Jakarta from the countryside, and ended up living in a train station.
By the age of 12 or 14, they'd become beggars and drug addicts.
The rural poor had become the urban poor, and in the process, they'd become invisible.
These heroin addicts in detox in Pakistan reminded me of figures in a play by Beckett: isolated, waiting in the dark, but drawn to the light.
Agent Orange was a defoliant used during the Vietnam War to deny cover to the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese army.
The active ingredient was dioxin, an extremely toxic chemical that was sprayed in vast quantities, and whose effects passed through the genes to the next generation.
In 2000, I began documenting global health issues, concentrating first on AIDS in Africa.
I tried to tell the story through the work of caregivers.
I thought it was important to emphasize that people were being helped, whether by international NGOs or by local grassroots organizations.
So many children have been orphaned by the epidemic that grandmothers have taken the place of parents, and a lot of children had been born with HIV.
A hospital in Zambia.
I began documenting the close connection between HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis.
This is an MSF hospital in Cambodia.
My pictures can play a supporting role to the work of NGOs by shedding light on the critical social problems they're trying to deal with.
I went to Congo with MSF, and contributed to a book and an exhibition that focused attention on a forgotten war in which millions of people have died, and exposure to disease without treatment is used as a weapon.
A malnourished child being measured as part of the supplemental feeding program.
In the fall of 2004 I went to Darfur.
This time I was on assignment for a magazine, but again worked closely with MSF.
The international community still hasn't found a way to create the pressure necessary to stop this genocide.
An MSF hospital in a camp for displaced people.
I've been working on a long project on crime and punishment in America.
This is a scene from New Orleans.
A prisoner on a chain gang in Alabama was punished by being handcuffed to a post in the midday sun.
This experience raised a lot of questions, among them questions about race and equality and for whom in our country opportunities and options are available.
In the yard of a chain gang in Alabama.
I didn't see either of the planes hit, and when I glanced out my window, I saw the first tower burning, and I thought it might have been an accident.
A few minutes later when I looked again and saw the second tower burning, I knew we were at war.
In the midst of the wreckage at Ground Zero, I had a realization.
I'd been photographing in the Islamic world since 1981 -- not only in the Middle East, but also in Africa, Asia and Europe.
At the time I was photographing in these different places, I thought I was covering separate stories, but on 9/11 history crystallized, and I understood I'd actually been covering a single story for more than 20 years, and the attack on New York was its latest manifestation.
The central commercial district of Kabul, Afghanistan at the end of the civil war, shortly before the city fell to the Taliban.
Land mine victims being helped at the Red Cross rehab center being run by Alberto Cairo.
A boy who lost a leg to a leftover mine.
I'd witnessed immense suffering in the Islamic world from political oppression, civil war, foreign invasions, poverty, famine.
I understood that in its suffering, the Islamic world had been crying out. Why weren't we listening?
A Taliban fighter shot during a battle as the Northern Alliance entered the city of Kunduz.
When war with Iraq was imminent, I realized the American troops would be very well covered, so I decided to cover the invasion from inside Baghdad.
A marketplace was hit by a mortar shell that killed several members of a single family.
A day after American forces entered Baghdad, a company of Marines began rounding up bank robbers and were cheered on by the crowds -- a hopeful moment that was short lived.
For the first time in years, Shi'ites were allowed to make the pilgrimage to Karbala to observe Ashura, and I was amazed by the sheer number of people and how fervently they practiced their religion.
A group of men march through the streets cutting themselves with knives.
It was obvious that the Shi'ites were a force to be reckoned with, and we would do well to understand them and learn how to deal with them.
Last year I spent several months documenting our wounded troops, from the battlefield in Iraq all the way home.
This is a helicopter medic giving CPR to a soldier who had been shot in the head.
Military medicine has become so efficient that the percentage of troops who survive after being wounded is much higher in this war than in any other war in our history.
The signature weapon of the war is the IED, and the signature wound is severe leg damage.
After enduring extreme pain and trauma, the wounded face a grueling physical and psychological struggle in rehab.
The spirit they displayed was absolutely remarkable.
I tried to imagine myself in their place, and I was totally humbled by their courage and determination in the face of such catastrophic loss.
Good people had been put in a very bad situation for questionable results.
One day in rehab someone, started talking about surfing and all these guys who'd never surfed before said, "Hey, let's go."
And they went surfing.
Photographers go to the extreme edges of human experience to show people what's going on.
Sometimes they put their lives on the line, because they believe your opinions and your influence matter.
They aim their pictures at your best instincts, generosity, a sense of right and wrong, the ability and the willingness to identify with others, the refusal to accept the unacceptable.
My TED wish: there's a vital story that needs to be told, and I wish for TED to help me gain access to it and then to help me come up with innovative and exciting ways to use news photography in the digital era.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Like every passionate software engineer out there, I closely follow technology companies in Silicon Valley, pretty much the same way soccer fans follow their teams in Europe.
I read articles on tech blogs and listen to podcasts on my phone.
But after I finish the article, lock my phone and unplug the headphones, I'm back in sub-Saharan Africa, where the landscape is not quite the same.
We have long and frequent power outages, low penetration of computers, slow internet connections and a lot of patients visiting understaffed hospitals.
Since the HIV epidemic, hospitals have been struggling to manage regular HIV treatment records for increasing volumes of patients.
For such environments, importing technology systems developed elsewhere has not worked, but in 2006, I joined Baobab Health, a team that uses locally based engineers to develop suitable interventions that are addressing health care challenges in Malawi.
We designed an electronic health record system that is used by health care workers while seeing patients.
And in the process we realized that we not only had to design the software, we had to implement the infrastructure as well.
We don't have enough medical staff to comprehensively examine every patient, so we embedded clinical guidelines within the software to guide nurses and clerks who assist with handling some of the workload.
Everyone has a birthday, but not everyone knows their birthday, so we wrote algorithms to handle estimated birthdates as complete dates.
How do we follow up patients living in slums with no street and house numbers?
We used landmarks to approximate their physical addresses.
Malawi had no IDs to uniquely identify patients, so we had to implement unique patient IDs to link patient records across clinics.
The IDs are printed as barcodes on labels that are stuck on personal health booklets kept by each patient.
With this barcoded ID, a simple scan with a barcode reader quickly pulls up the patient's records.
No need to rewrite their personal details on paper registers at every visit.
And suddenly, queues became shorter.
This meant patients, typically mothers with little children on their backs, had to spend less time waiting to be assisted.
And if they lose their booklets, their records can still be pulled by searching with their names.
Now, the way we pronounce and spell names varies tremendously.
We freely mix R's and L's, English and vernacular versions of their names.
Even soundex, a standard method for grouping words by how similar they sound, was not good enough.
So we had to modify it to help us link and match existing records.
Before the iPhone, software engineers developed for personal computers, but from our experience, we knew our power system is not reliable enough for personal computers.
So we repurposed touch screen point-of-sale terminals that are meant for retail shops to become clinical workstations.
At the time, we imported internet appliances called i-Openers that were manufactured during the dot-com era by a failed US company.
We modified their screens to add touch sensors and their power system to run from rechargeable batteries.
When we started, we didn't find a reliable network to transmit data, especially from rural hospitals.
So we built our own towers, created a wireless network and linked clinics in Lilongwe, Malawi's capital.
(Applause) With a team of engineers working within a hospital campus, we observed health care workers use the system and iteratively build an information system that is now managing HIV records in all major public hospitals in Malawi.
These are hospitals serving over 2,000 HIV patients, each clinic.
Now, health care workers who used to spend days to tally and prepare quarterly reports are producing the same reports within minutes, and health care experts from all over the world are now coming to Malawi to learn how we did it.
(Applause) It is inspiring and fun to follow technology trends across the globe, but to make them work in low-resourced environments like public hospitals in sub-Saharan Africa, we have had to become jacks-of-all-trades and build whole systems, including the infrastructure, from the ground up.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In March 2017, the mayor of Cape Town officially declared Cape Town a local disaster, as it had less than four months left of usable water.
Residents were restricted to 100 liters of water per person, per day.
But what does that really mean?
With 100 liters of water per day, you can take a five-minute shower, wash your face twice and probably flush the toilet about five times.
You still didn't brush your teeth, you didn't do laundry, and you definitely didn't water your plants.
You, unfortunately, didn't wash your hands after those five toilet flushes.
And you didn't even take a sip of water.
The mayor described this as that it means a new relationship with water.
Today, seven months later, I can share two things about my second home with you.
First: Cape Town hasn't run out of water just yet.
But as of September 3rd, the hundred-liter limit dropped to 87 liters.
The mayor defined the city's new normal as one of permanent drought.
Second: what's happening in Cape Town is pretty much coming to many other cities and countries in the world.
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, excluding countries that we don't have data for, less than five percent of the world's population is living in a country that has more water today than it did 20 years ago.
Everyone else is living in a country that has less water today.
And nearly one out of three are living in a country that is facing a water crisis.
I grew up in Jordan, a water-poor country that has experienced absolute water scarcity since 1973.
And still, in 2017, only 10 countries in the world have less water than Jordan.
So dealing with a lack of water is quite ingrained in my soul.
As soon as I was old enough to learn how to write my name, I also learned that I need to conserve water.
My parents would constantly remind my siblings and I to close the tap when we brushed our teeth.
We used to fill balloons with flour instead of water when we played.
It's just as much fun, though.
(Laughter) And a few years ago, when my friends and I were dared to do the Ice Bucket Challenge, we did that with sand.
(Laughter) And you might think that, you know, that's easy, sand is not ice cold.
I promise you, sand goes everywhere, and it took ages to get rid of it.
But what perhaps I didn't realize as I played with flour balloons as a child, and as I poured sand on my head as an adult, is that some of the techniques that seem second nature to me and to others who live in dry countries might help us all address what is fast becoming a global crisis.
I wish to share three lessons today, three lessons from water-poor countries and how they survived and even thrived despite their water crisis.
Lesson one: tell people how much water they really have.
In order to solve a problem, we need to acknowledge that we have one.
And when it comes to water, people can easily turn a blind eye, pretending that since water is coming out of the tap now, everything will be fine forever.
But some smart, drought-affected countries have adopted simple, innovative measures to make sure their citizens, their communities and their companies know just how dry their countries are.
When I was in Cape Town earlier this year, I saw this electronic billboard on the freeway, indicating how much water the city had left.
This is an idea they may well have borrowed from Australia when it faced one of the worst droughts of the country's history from 1997 to 2009.
Water levels in Melbourne dropped to a very low capacity of almost 26 percent.
But the city didn't yell at people.
It didn't plead with them not to use water.
They used electronic billboards to flash available levels of water to all citizens across the city.
They were honestly telling people how much water they really have, and letting them take responsibility for themselves.
By the end of the drought, this created such a sense of urgency as well as a sense of community.
Nearly one out of three citizens in Melbourne had invested in installing rainwater holding tanks for their own households.
Actions that citizens took didn't stop at installing those tanks.
With help from the city, they were able to do something even more impactful.
Taking me to lesson two: empower people to save water.
Melbourne wanted people to spend less water in their homes.
And one way to do that is to spend less time in the shower.
However, interviews revealed that some people, women in particular, weren't keen on saving water that way.
Some of them honestly said, "The shower is not just to clean up.
It's my sanctuary.
It's a space I go to relax, not just clean up."
So the city started offering water-efficient showerheads for free.
And then, now some people complained that the showerheads looked ugly or didn't suit their bathrooms.
So what I like to call "The Showerhead Team" developed a small water-flow regulator that can be fitted into existing showerheads.
And although showerhead beauty doesn't matter much to me, I loved how the team didn't give up and instead came up with a simple, unique solution to empower people to save water.
Within a span of four years, more than 460,000 showerheads were replaced.
When the small regulator was introduced, more than 100,000 orders of that were done.
Melbourne succeeded in reducing the water demands per capita by 50 percent.
In the United Arab Emirates, the second-most water-scarce country in the world, officials designed what they called the "Business Heroes Toolkit" in 2010.
The aim was to motivate and empower businesses to reduce water and energy consumption.
The toolkit practically taught companies how to measure their existing water-consumption levels and consisted of tips to help them reduce those levels.
And it worked.
Hundreds of organizations downloaded the toolkit.
And several of them joined what they called the "Corporate Heroes Network," where companies can voluntarily take on a challenge to reduce their water-consumption levels to preset targets within a period of one year.
Companies which completed the challenge saved on average 35 percent of water.
And one company, for example, implemented as many water-saving tips as they could in their office space.
They replaced their toilet-flushing techniques, taps, showerheads -- you name it.
If it saved water, they replaced it, eventually reducing their employees' water consumption by half.
Empowering individuals and companies to save water is so critical, yet not sufficient.
Countries need to look beyond the status quo and implement country-level actions to save water.
Taking me to lesson three: look below the surface.
Water savings can come from unexpected places.
Singapore is the eighth most water-scarce country in the world.
It depends on imported water for almost 60 percent of its water needs.
It's also a very small island.
As such, it needs to make use of as much space as possible to catch rainfall.
So in 2008, they built the Marina Barrage.
It's the first-ever urban water reservoir built in the middle of the city-state.
It's the largest water catchment in the country, almost one-sixth the size of Singapore.
What's so amazing about the Marina Barrage is that it has been built to make the maximum use of its large size and its unexpected yet important location.
It brings three valuable benefits to the country: it has boosted Singapore's water supply by 10 percent; it protects low areas around it from floods because of its connection to the sea; and, as you can see, it acts as a beautiful lifestyle attraction, hosting several events, from art exhibitions to music festivals, attracting joggers, bikers, tourists all around that area.
Now, not all initiatives need to be stunning or even visible.
My first home, Jordan, realized that agriculture is consuming the majority of its fresh water.
They really wanted to encourage farmers to focus on growing low water-intensive crops.
To achieve that, the local agriculture is increasing its focus on date palms and grapevines.
Those two are much more tolerant to drought conditions than many other fruits and vegetables, and at the same time, they are considered high-value crops, both locally and internationally.
Locals in Namibia, one of the most arid countries in Southern Africa, have been drinking recycled water since 1968.
Now, you may tell me many countries recycle water.
I would say yes.
But very few use it for drinking purposes, mostly because people don't like the thought of water that was in their toilets going to their taps.
But Namibia could not afford to think that way.
They looked below the surface to save water.
They are now a great example of how, when countries purify waste water to drinking standards, they can ease their water shortages, and in Namibia's case, provide drinking water for more than 300,000 citizens in its capital city.
As more countries which used to be more water rich are becoming water scarce, I say we don't need to reinvent the wheel.
If we just look at what water-poor countries have done, the solutions are out there.
Now it's really just up to all of us to take action.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Salaam. Namaskar.
Good morning.
Given my TED profile, you might be expecting that I'm going to speak to you about the latest philanthropic trends -- the one that's currently got Wall Street and the World Bank buzzing -- how to invest in women, how to empower them, how to save them.
Not me.
I am interested in how women are saving us.
They're saving us by redefining and re-imagining a future that defies and blurs accepted polarities, polarities we've taken for granted for a long time, like the ones between modernity and tradition, First World and Third World, oppression and opportunity.
In the midst of the daunting challenges we face as a global community, there's something about this third way raga that is making my heart sing.
What intrigues me most is how women are doing this, despite a set of paradoxes that are both frustrating and fascinating.
Why is it that women are, on the one hand, viciously oppressed by cultural practices, and yet at the same time, are the preservers of cultures in most societies?
Is the hijab or the headscarf a symbol of submission or resistance?
When so many women and girls are beaten, raped, maimed on a daily basis in the name of all kinds of causes -- honor, religion, nationality -- what allows women to replant trees, to rebuild societies, to lead radical, non-violent movements for social change?
Is it different women who are doing the preserving and the radicalizing?
Or are they one and the same?
Are we guilty, as Chimamanda Adichie reminded us at the TED conference in Oxford, of assuming that there is a single story of women's struggles for their rights while there are, in fact, many?
And what, if anything, do men have to do with it?
Much of my life has been a quest to get some answers to these questions.
It's taken me across the globe and introduced me to some amazing people.
In the process, I've gathered a few fragments that help me shed some light on this puzzle.
Among those who've helped open my eyes to a third way are: a devout Muslim in Afghanistan, a group of harmonizing lesbians in Croatia and a taboo breaker in Liberia.
I'm indebted to them, as I am to my parents, who for some set of misdemeanors in their last life, were blessed with three daughters in this one.
And for reasons equally unclear to me, seem to be inordinately proud of the three of us.
I was born and raised here in India, and I learned from an early age to be deeply suspicious of the aunties and uncles who would bend down, pat us on the head and then say to my parents with no problem at all, "Poor things. You only have three daughters.
But you're young, you could still try again."
My sense of outrage about women's rights was brought to a boil when I was about 11.
My aunt, an incredibly articulate and brilliant woman, was widowed early.
A flock of relatives descended on her.
They took off her colorful sari.
They made her wear a white one.
They wiped her bindi off her forehead.
They broke her bangles.
Her daughter, Rani, a few years older than me, sat in her lap bewildered, not knowing what had happened to the confident woman she once knew as her mother.
Late that night, I heard my mother begging my father, "Please do something Ramu. Can't you intervene?"
And my father, in a low voice, muttering, "I'm just the youngest brother, there's nothing I can do.
This is tradition."
That's the night I learned the rules about what it means to be female in this world.
Women don't make those rules, but they define us, and they define our opportunities and our chances.
And men are affected by those rules too.
My father, who had fought in three wars, could not save his own sister from this suffering.
By 18, under the excellent tutelage of my mother, I was therefore, as you might expect, defiantly feminist.
On the streets chanting, "[Hindi] [Hindi] We are the women of India.
We are not flowers, we are sparks of change."
By the time I got to Beijing in 1995, it was clear to me, the only way to achieve gender equality was to overturn centuries of oppressive tradition.
Soon after I returned from Beijing, I leapt at the chance to work for this wonderful organization, founded by women, to support women's rights organizations around the globe.
But barely six months into my new job, I met a woman who forced me to challenge all my assumptions.
Her name is Sakena Yacoobi.
She walked into my office at a time when no one knew where Afghanistan was in the United States.
She said to me, "It is not about the burka."
She was the most determined advocate for women's rights I had ever heard.
She told me women were running underground schools in her communities inside Afghanistan, and that her organization, the Afghan Institute of Learning, had started a school in Pakistan.
She said, "The first thing anyone who is a Muslim knows is that the Koran requires and strongly supports literacy.
The prophet wanted every believer to be able to read the Koran for themselves."
Had I heard right?
Was a women's rights advocate invoking religion?
But Sakena defies labels.
She always wears a headscarf, but I've walked alongside with her on a beach with her long hair flying in the breeze.
She starts every lecture with a prayer, but she's a single, feisty, financially independent woman in a country where girls are married off at the age of 12.
She is also immensely pragmatic.
"This headscarf and these clothes," she says, "give me the freedom to do what I need to do to speak to those whose support and assistance are critical for this work.
When I had to open the school in the refugee camp, I went to see the imam.
I told him, 'I'm a believer, and women and children in these terrible conditions need their faith to survive.'" She smiles slyly.
"He was flattered.
He began to come twice a week to my center because women could not go to the mosque.
And after he would leave, women and girls would stay behind.
We began with a small literacy class to read the Koran, then a math class, then an English class, then computer classes.
In a few weeks, everyone in the refugee camp was in our classes."
Sakena is a teacher at a time when to educate women is a dangerous business in Afghanistan.
She is on the Taliban's hit list.
I worry about her every time she travels across that country.
She shrugs when I ask her about safety.
"Kavita jaan, we cannot allow ourselves to be afraid.
Look at those young girls who go back to school when acid is thrown in their face."
And I smile, and I nod, realizing I'm watching women and girls using their own religious traditions and practices, turning them into instruments of opposition and opportunity.
Their path is their own and it looks towards an Afghanistan that will be different.
Being different is something the women of Lesbor in Zagreb, Croatia know all too well.
To be a lesbian, a dyke, a homosexual in most parts of the world, including right here in our country, India, is to occupy a place of immense discomfort and extreme prejudice.
In post-conflict societies like Croatia, where a hyper-nationalism and religiosity have created an environment unbearable for anyone who might be considered a social outcast.
So enter a group of out dykes, young women who love the old music that once spread across that region from Macedonia to Bosnia, from Serbia to Slovenia.
These folk singers met at college at a gender studies program.
Many are in their 20s, some are mothers.
Many have struggled to come out to their communities, in families whose religious beliefs make it hard to accept that their daughters are not sick, just queer.
As Leah, one of the founders of the group, says, "I like traditional music very much.
I also like rock and roll.
So Lesbor, we blend the two.
I see traditional music like a kind of rebellion, in which people can really speak their voice, especially traditional songs from other parts of the former Yugoslav Republic.
After the war, lots of these songs were lost, but they are a part of our childhood and our history, and we should not forget them."
Improbably, this LGBT singing choir has demonstrated how women are investing in tradition to create change, like alchemists turning discord into harmony.
Their repertoire includes the Croatian national anthem, a Bosnian love song and Serbian duets.
And, Leah adds with a grin, "Kavita, we especially are proud of our Christmas music, because it shows we are open to religious practices even though Catholic Church hates us LGBT."
Their concerts draw from their own communities, yes, but also from an older generation: a generation that might be suspicious of homosexuality, but is nostalgic for its own music and the past it represents.
One father, who had initially balked at his daughter coming out in such a choir, now writes songs for them.
In the Middle Ages, troubadours would travel across the land singing their tales and sharing their verses: Lesbor travels through the Balkans like this, singing, connecting people divided by religion, nationality and language.
Bosnians, Croats and Serbs find a rare shared space of pride in their history, and Lesbor reminds them that the songs one group often claims as theirs alone really belong to them all.
(Singing) Yesterday, Mallika Sarabhai showed us that music can create a world more accepting of difference than the one we have been given.
The world Leymah Gbowee was given was a world at war.
Liberia had been torn apart by civil strife for decades.
Leymah was not an activist, she was a mother of three.
But she was sick with worry: She worried her son would be abducted and taken off to be a child soldier, she worried her daughters would be raped, she worried for their lives.
One night, she had a dream.
She dreamt she and thousands of other women ended the bloodshed.
The next morning at church, she asked others how they felt.
They were all tired of the fighting.
We need peace, and we need our leaders to know we will not rest until there is peace.
Among Leymah's friends was a policewoman who was Muslim.
She promised to raise the issue with her community.
At the next Friday sermon, the women who were sitting in the side room of the mosque began to share their distress at the state of affairs.
"What does it matter?" they said, "A bullet doesn't distinguish between a Muslim and a Christian."
This small group of women, determined to bring an end to the war, and they chose to use their traditions to make a point: Liberian women usually wear lots of jewelry and colorful clothing.
But no, for the protest, they dressed all in white, no makeup.
As Leymah said, "We wore the white saying we were out for peace."
They stood on the side of the road on which Charles Taylor's motorcade passed every day.
They stood for weeks -- first just 10, then 20, then 50, then hundreds of women -- wearing white, singing, dancing, saying they were out for peace.
Eventually, opposing forces in Liberia were pushed to hold peace talks in Ghana.
The peace talks dragged on and on and on.
Leymah and her sisters had had enough.
With their remaining funds, they took a small group of women down to the venue of the peace talks and they surrounded the building.
In a now famous CNN clip, you can see them sitting on the ground, their arms linked.
We know this in India. It's called a [Hindi].
Then things get tense.
The police are called in to physically remove the women.
As the senior officer approaches with a baton, Leymah stands up with deliberation, reaches her arms up over her head, and begins, very slowly, to untie her headdress that covers her hair.
You can see the policeman's face.
He looks embarrassed. He backs away.
And the next thing you know, the police have disappeared.
Leymah said to me later, "It's a taboo, you know, in West Africa.
If an older woman undresses in front of a man because she wants to, the man's family is cursed."
(Laughter) (Applause) She said, "I don't know if he did it because he believed, but he knew we were not going to leave.
We were not going to leave until the peace accord was signed."
And the peace accord was signed.
And the women of Liberia then mobilized in support of Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, a woman who broke a few taboos herself becoming the first elected woman head of state in Africa in years.
When she made her presidential address, she acknowledged these brave women of Liberia who allowed her to win against a football star -- that's soccer for you Americans -- no less.
Women like Sakena and Leah and Leymah have humbled me and changed me and made me realize that I should not be so quick to jump to assumptions of any kind.
They've also saved me from my righteous anger by offering insights into this third way.
A Filipina activist once said to me, "How do you cook a rice cake?
With heat from the bottom and heat from the top."
The protests, the marches, the uncompromising position that women's rights are human rights, full stop.
That's the heat from the bottom.
That's Malcolm X and the suffragists and gay pride parades.
But we also need the heat from the top.
And in most parts of the world, that top is still controlled by men.
So to paraphrase Marx: Women make change, but not in circumstances of their own choosing.
They have to negotiate.
They have to subvert tradition that once silenced them in order to give voice to new aspirations.
And they need allies from their communities.
Allies like the imam, allies like the father who now writes songs for a lesbian group in Croatia, allies like the policeman who honored a taboo and backed away, allies like my father, who couldn't help his sister but has helped three daughters pursue their dreams.
Maybe this is because feminism, unlike almost every other social movement, is not a struggle against a distinct oppressor -- it's not the ruling class or the occupiers or the colonizers -- it's against a deeply held set of beliefs and assumptions that we women, far too often, hold ourselves.
And perhaps this is the ultimate gift of feminism, that the personal is in fact the political.
So that, as Eleanor Roosevelt said once of human rights, the same is true of gender equality: that it starts in small places, close to home.
On the streets, yes, but also in negotiations at the kitchen table and in the marital bed and in relationships between lovers and parents and sisters and friends.
And then you realize that by integrating aspects of tradition and community into their struggles, women like Sakena and Leah and Leymah -- but also women like Sonia Gandhi here in India and Michelle Bachelet in Chile and Shirin Ebadi in Iran -- are doing something else.
They're challenging the very notion of Western models of development.
They are saying, we don't have to be like you to make change.
We can wear a sari or a hijab or pants or a boubou, and we can be party leaders and presidents and human rights lawyers.
We can use our tradition to navigate change.
We can demilitarize societies and pour resources, instead, into reservoirs of genuine security.
It is in these little stories, these individual stories, that I see a radical epic being written by women around the world.
It is in these threads that are being woven into a resilient fabric that will sustain communities, that I find hope.
And if my heart is singing, it's because in these little fragments, every now and again, you catch a glimpse of a whole, of a whole new world.
And she is definitely on her way.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: OK, Stewart, in the '60s, you -- I think it was '68 -- you founded this magazine.
Stewart Brand: Bravo! It's the original one.
That's hard to find.
CA: Right. Issue One, right?
SB: Mm hmm.
CA: Why did that make so much impact?
SB: Counterculture was the main event that I was part of at the time, and it was made up of hippies and New Left.
That was sort of my contemporaries, the people I was just slightly older than.
And my mode is to look at where the interesting flow is and then look in the other direction.
CA: (Laughs) SB: Partly, I was trained to do that as an army officer, but partly, it's just a cheap heuristic to find originalities: don't look where everybody else is looking, look the opposite way.
So the deal with counterculture is, the hippies were very romantic and kind of against technology, except very good LSD from Sandoz, and the New Left was against technology because they thought it was a power device.
Computers were: do not spindle, fold, or mutilate.
Fight that.
And so, the Whole Earth Catalog was kind of a counter-counterculture thing in the sense that I bought Buckminster Fuller's idea that tools of are of the essence.
Science and engineers basically define the world in interesting ways.
If all the politicians disappeared one week, it would be ... a nuisance.
But if all the scientists and engineers disappeared one week, it would be way more than a nuisance.
CA: We still believe that, I think.
SB: So focus on that.
And then the New Left was talking about power to the people.
And people like Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak cut that and just said, power to people, tools that actually work.
And so, where Fuller was saying don't try to change human nature, people have been trying for a long time and it does not even bend, but you can change tools very easily.
So the efficient thing to do if you want to make the world better is not try to make people behave differently like the New Left was, but just give them tools that go in the right direction.
That was the Whole Earth Catalog.
CA: And Stewart, the central image -- this is one of the first images, the first time people had seen Earth from outer space.
That had an impact, too.
SB: It was kind of a chance that in the spring of '66, thanks to an LSD experience on a rooftop in San Francisco, I got thinking about, again, something that Fuller talked about, that a lot of people assume that the Earth is flat and kind of infinite in terms of its resources, but once you really grasp that it's a sphere and that there's only so much of it, then you start husbanding your resources and thinking about it as a finite system.
"Spaceship Earth" was his metaphor.
And I wanted that to be the case, but on LSD I was getting higher and higher on my hundred micrograms on the roof of San Francisco, and noticed that the downtown buildings which were right in front of me were not all parallel, they were sort of fanned out like this.
And that's because they are on a curved surface.
And if I were even higher, I would see that even more clearly, higher than that, more clearly still, higher enough, and it would close, and you would get the circle of Earth from space.
And I thought, you know, we've been in space for 10 years -- at that time, this is '66 -- and the cameras had never looked back.
They'd always been looking out or looking at just parts of the Earth.
And so I said, why haven't we seen a photograph of the whole Earth yet?
And it went around and NASA got it and senators, secretaries got it, and various people in the Politburo got it, and it went around and around.
And within two and a half years, about the time the Whole Earth Catalog came out, these images started to appear, and indeed, they did transform everything.
And my idea of hacking civilization is that you try to do something lazy and ingenious and just sort of trick the situation.
So all of these photographs that you see -- and then the march for science last week, they were carrying these Whole Earth banners and so on -- I did that with no work.
I sold those buttons for 25 cents apiece.
So, you know, tweaking the system is, I think, not only the most efficient way to make the system go in interesting ways, but in some ways, the safest way, because when you try to horse the whole system around in a big way, you can get into big horsing-around problems, but if you tweak it, it will adjust to the tweak.
CA: So since then, among many other things, you've been regarded as a leading voice in the environmental movement, but you are also a counterculturalist, and recently, you've been taking on a lot of, well, you've been declaring what a lot of environmentalists almost believe are heresies.
I kind of want to explore a couple of those.
I mean, tell me about this image here.
SB: Ha-ha!
That's a National Geographic image of what is called the mammoth steppe, what the far north, the sub-Arctic and Arctic region, used to look like.
In fact, the whole world used to look like that.
What we find in South Africa and the Serengeti now, lots of big animals, was the case in this part of Canada, throughout the US, throughout Eurasia, throughout the world.
This was the norm and can be again.
So in a sense, my long-term goal at this point is to not only bring back those animals and the grassland they made, which could be a climate stabilization system over the long run, but even the mammoths there in the background that are part of the story.
And I think that's probably a 200-year goal.
Maybe in 100, by the end of this century, we should be able to dial down the extinction rate to sort of what it's been in the background.
Bringing back this amount of bio-abundance will take longer, but it's worth doing.
CA: We'll come back to the mammoths, but explain how we should think of extinctions.
Obviously, one of the huge concerns right now is that extinction is happening at a faster rate than ever in history.
That's the meme that's out there.
How should we think of it?
SB: The story that's out there is that we're in the middle of the Sixth Extinction or maybe in the beginning of the Sixth Extinction.
Because we're in the de-extinction business, the preventing-extinction business with Revive &amp; Restore, we started looking at what's actually going on with extinction.
And it turns out, there's a very confused set of data out there which gets oversimplified into the narrative of we're becoming ...
Here are five mass extinctions that are indicated by the yellow triangles, and we're now next.
The last one there on the far right was the meteor that struck 66 million years ago and did in the dinosaurs.
And the story is, we're the next meteor.
Well, here's the deal.
I wound up researching this for a paper I wrote, that a mass extinction is when 75 percent of all the species in the world go extinct.
Well, there's on the order of five-and-a-half-million species, of which we've identified one and a half million.
Another 14,000 are being identified every year.
There's a lot of biology going on out there.
Since 1500, about 500 species have gone extinct, and you'll see the term "mass extinction" kind of used in strange ways.
So there was, about a year and a half ago, a front-page story by Carl Zimmer in the New York Times, "Mass Extinction in the Oceans, Broad Studies Show."
And then you read into the article, and it mentions that since 1500, 15 species -- one, five -- have gone extinct in the oceans, and, oh, by the way, none in the last 50 years.
And you read further into the story, and it's saying, the horrifying thing that's going on is that the fisheries are so overfishing the wild fishes, that it is taking down the fish populations in the oceans by 38 percent.
That's the serious thing.
None of those species are probably going to go extinct.
So you've just put, that headline writer put a panic button on the top of the story.
It's clickbait kind of stuff, but it's basically saying, "Oh my God, start panicking, we're going to lose all the species in the oceans."
Nothing like that is in prospect.
And in fact, what I then started looking into in a little more detail, the Red List shows about 23,000 species that are considered threatened at one level or another, coming from the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, the IUCN.
And Nature Magazine had a piece surveying the loss of wildlife, and it said, "If all of those 23,000 went extinct in the next century or so, and that rate of extinction carried on for more centuries and millennia, then we might be at the beginning of a sixth extinction.
So the exaggeration is way out of hand.
But environmentalists always exaggerate.
That's a problem.
CA: I mean, they probably feel a moral responsibility to, because they care so much about the thing that they are looking at, and unless you bang the drum for it, maybe no one listens.
SB: Every time somebody says moral this or moral that -- "moral hazard," "precautionary principle" -- these are terms that are used to basically say no to things.
CA: So the problem isn't so much fish extinction, animal extinction, it's fish flourishing, animal flourishing, that we're crowding them to some extent?
SB: Yeah, and I think we are crowding, and there is losses going on.
The major losses are caused by agriculture, and so anything that improves agriculture and basically makes it more condensed, more highly productive, including GMOs, please, but even if you want to do vertical farms in town, including inside farms, all the things that have been learned about how to grow pot in basements, is now being applied to growing vegetables inside containers -- that's great, that's all good stuff, because land sparing is the main thing we can do for nature.
People moving to cities is good.
Making agriculture less of a destruction of the landscape is good.
CA: There people talking about bringing back species, rewilding ...
Well, first of all, rewilding species: What's the story with these guys?
SB: Ha-ha! Wolves.
Europe, connecting to the previous point, we're now at probably peak farmland, and, by the way, in terms of population, we are already at peak children being alive.
Henceforth, there will be fewer and fewer children.
We are in the last doubling of human population, and it will get to nine, maybe nine and a half billion, and then start not just leveling off, but probably going down.
Likewise, farmland has now peaked, and one of the ways that plays out in Europe is there's a lot of abandoned farmland now, which immediately reforests.
They don't do wildlife corridors in Europe.
They don't need to, because so many of these farms are connected that they've made reforested wildlife corridors, that the wolves are coming back, in this case, to Spain.
They've gotten all the way to the Netherlands.
There's bears coming back. There's lynx coming back.
There's the European jackal. I had no idea such a thing existed.
They're coming back from Italy to the rest of Europe.
And unlike here, these are all predators, which is kind of interesting.
They are being welcomed by Europeans. They've been missed.
CA: And counterintuitively, when you bring back the predators, it actually increases rather than reduces the diversity of the underlying ecosystem often.
SB: Yeah, generally predators and large animals -- large animals and large animals with sharp teeth and claws -- are turning out to be highly important for a really rich ecosystem.
CA: Which maybe brings us to this rather more dramatic rewilding project that you've got yourself involved in.
Why would someone want to bring back these terrifying woolly mammoths?
SB: Hmm. Asian elephants are the closest relative to the woolly mammoth, and they're about the same size, genetically very close.
They diverged quite recently in evolutionary history.
The Asian elephants are closer to woolly mammoths than they are to African elephants, but they're close enough to African elephants that they have successfully hybridized.
So we're working with George Church at Harvard, who has already moved the genes for four major traits from the now well-preserved, well-studied genome of the woolly mammoth, thanks to so-called "ancient DNA analysis."
And in the lab, he has moved those genes into living Asian elephant cell lines, where they're taking up their proper place thanks to CRISPR.
I mean, they're not shooting the genes in like you did with genetic engineering.
Now with CRISPR you're editing, basically, one allele, and replacing it in the place of another allele.
So you're now getting basically Asian elephant germline cells that are effectively in terms of the traits that you're going for to be comfortable in the Arctic, you're getting them in there.
So we go through the process of getting that through a surrogate mother, an Asian elephant mother.
You can get a proxy, as it's being called by conservation biologists, of the woolly mammoth, that is effectively a hairy, curly-trunked, Asian elephant that is perfectly comfortable in the sub-Arctic.
Now, it's the case, so many people say, "Well, how are you going to get them there?
And Asian elephants, they don't like snow, right?"
Well, it turns out, they do like snow.
There's some in an Ontario zoo that have made snowballs bigger than people.
They just love -- you know, with a trunk, you can start a little thing, roll it and make it bigger.
And then people say, "Yeah, but it's 22 months of gestation.
This kind of cross-species cloning is tricky business, anyway.
Are you going to lose some of the surrogate Asian elephant mothers?"
And then George Church says, "That's all right.
We'll do an artificial uterus and grow them that way."
Then people say, "Yeah, next century, maybe," except the news came out this week in Nature that there's now an artificial uterus in which they've grown a lamb to four weeks.
That's halfway through its gestation period.
So this stuff is moving right along.
CA: But why should we want a world where -- Picture a world where there are thousands of these things thundering across Siberia.
Is that a better world?
SB: Potentially. It's -- (Laughter) There's three groups, basically, working on the woolly mammoth seriously: Revive &amp; Restore, we're kind of in the middle; George Church and the group at Harvard that are doing the genetics in the lab; and then there's an amazing old scientist named Zimov who works in northern Siberia, and his son Nikita, who has bought into the system, and they are, Sergey and Nikita Zimov have been, for 25 years, creating what they call "Pleistocene Park," which is a place in a really tough part of Siberia that is pure tundra.
And the research that's been done shows that there's probably one one-hundredth of the animals on the landscape there that there used to be.
Like that earlier image, we saw lots of animals.
Now there's almost none.
The tundra is mostly moss, and then there's the boreal forest.
And that's the way it is, folks. There's just a few animals there.
So they brought in a lot of grazing animals: musk ox, Yakutian horses, they're bringing in some bison, they're bringing in some more now, and put them in at the density that they used to be.
And grasslands are made by grazers.
So these animals are there, grazing away, and they're doing a couple of things.
First of all, they're turning the tundra, the moss, back into grassland.
Grassland fixes carbon.
Tundra, in a warming world, is thawing and releasing a lot of carbon dioxide and also methane.
So already in their little 25 square miles, they're doing a climate stabilization thing.
Part of that story, though, is that the boreal forest is very absorbent to sunlight, even in the winter when snow is on the ground.
And the way the mammoth steppe, which used to wrap all the way around the North Pole -- there's a lot of landmass around the North Pole -- that was all this grassland.
And the steppe was magnificent, probably one of the most productive biomes in the world, the biggest biome in the world.
The forest part of it, right now, Sergey Zimov and Nikita go out with this old military tank they got for nothing, and they knock down the trees.
And that's a bore, and it's tiresome, and as Sergey says, "... and they make no dung!"
which, by the way, these big animals do, including mammoths.
So mammoths become what conservation biologists call an umbrella species.
It's an exciting animal -- pandas in China or wherever -- that the excitement that goes on of making life good for that animal is making a habitat, an ecosystem, which is good for a whole lot of creatures and plants, and it ideally gets to the point of being self-managing, where the conservation biologists can back off and say, "All we have to do is keep out the destructive invasives, and this thing can just cook."
CA: So there's many other species that you're dreaming of de-extincting at some point, but I think what I'd actually like to move on to is this idea you talked about how mammoths might help green Siberia in a sense, or at least, I'm not talking about tropical rainforest, but this question of greening the planet you've thought about a lot.
And the traditional story is that deforestation is one of the most awful curses of modern times, and that it's a huge contributor to climate change.
And then you went and sent me this graph here, or this map.
What is this map?
SB: Global greening.
The thing to do with any narrative that you get from headlines and from short news stories is to look for what else is going on, and look for what Marc Andreessen calls "narrative violation."
So the narrative -- and Al Gore is master of putting it out there -- is that there's this civilization-threatening climate change coming on very rapidly.
We have to cease all extra production of greenhouse gases, especially CO2, as soon as possible, otherwise, we're in deep, deep trouble.
All of that is true, but it's not the whole story, and the whole story is more interesting than these fragmentary stories.
Plants love CO2.
What plants are made of is CO2 plus water via sunshine.
And so in many greenhouses, industrialized greenhouses, they add CO2 because the plants turn that into plant matter.
So the studies have been done with satellites and other things, and what you're seeing here is a graph of, over the last 33 years or so, there's 14 percent more leaf action going on.
There's that much more biomass.
There's that much more what ecologists call "primary production."
There's that much more life happening, thanks to climate change, thanks to all of our goddam coal plants.
So -- whoa, what's going on here?
By the way, crop production goes up with this.
This is a partial counter to the increase of CO2, because there's that much more plant that is sucking it down into plant matter.
Some of that then decays and goes right back up, but some of it is going down into roots and going into the soil and staying there.
So these counter things are part of what you need to bear in mind, and the deeper story is that thinking about and dealing with and engineering climate is a pretty complex process.
It's like medicine.
You're always, again, tweaking around with the system to see what makes an improvement.
Then you do more of that, see it's still getting better, then -- oop! -- that's enough, back off half a turn.
CA: But might some people say, "Not all green is created equal."
Possibly what we're doing is trading off the magnificence of the rainforest and all that diversity for, I don't know, green pond scum or grass or something like that.
SB: In this particular study, it turns out every form of plant is increasing.
Now, what's interestingly left out of this study is what the hell is going on in the oceans.
Primary production in the oceans, the biota of the oceans, mostly microbial, what they're up to is probably the most important thing.
They're the ones that create the atmosphere that we're happily breathing, and they're not part of this study.
This is one of the things James Lovelock has been insisting; basically, our knowledge of the oceans, especially of ocean life, is fundamentally vapor, in this sense.
So we're in the process of finding out by inadvertent bad geoengineering of too much CO2 in the atmosphere, finding out, what is the ocean doing with that?
Well, the ocean, with the extra heat, is swelling up.
That's most of where we're getting the sea level rise, and there's a lot more coming with more global warming.
We're getting terrible harm to some of the coral reefs, like off of Australia.
The great reef there is just a lot of bleaching from overheating.
And this is why I and Danny Hillis, in our previous session on the main stage, was saying, "Look, geoengineering is worth experimenting with enough to see that it works, to see if we can buy time in the warming aspect of all of this, tweak the system with small but usable research, and then see if we should do more than tweak.
CA: OK, so this is what we're going to talk about for the last few minutes here because it's such an important discussion.
First of all, this book was just published by Yuval Harari.
He's basically saying the next evolution of humans is to become as gods.
I think he -- SB: Now, you've talked to him. And you've probably finished the book.
I haven't finished it yet.
Where does he come out on -- CA: I mean, it's a pretty radical view.
He thinks that we will completely remake ourselves using data, using bioengineering, to become completely new creatures that have, kind of, superpowers, and that there will be huge inequality.
But we're about to write a very radical, brand-new chapter of history.
That's what he believes.
SB: Is he nervous about that? I forget.
CA: He's nervous about it, but I think he also likes provoking people.
SB: Are you nervous about that?
CA: I'm nervous about that.
But, you know, with so much at TED, I'm excited and nervous.
And the optimist in me is trying hard to lean towards "This is awesome and really exciting," while the sort of responsible part of me is saying, "But, uh, maybe we should be a little bit careful as to how we think of it."
SB: That's your secret sauce, isn't it, for TED?
Staying nervous and excited.
CA: It's also the recipe for being a little bit schizophrenic.
But he didn't quote you.
What I thought was an astonishing statement that you made right back in the original Whole Earth Catalog, you ended it with this powerful phrase: "We are as gods, and might as well get good at it."
And then more recently, you've upgraded that statement.
I want you talk about this philosophy.
SB: Well, one of the things I'm learning is that documentation is better than memory -- by far.
And one of the things I've learned from somebody -- I actually got on Twitter.
It changed my life -- it hasn't forgiven me yet!
And I took ownership of this phrase when somebody quoted it, and somebody else said, "Oh by the way, that isn't what you originally wrote in that first 1968 Whole Earth Catalog.
You wrote, 'We are as gods and might as well get used to it.'" I'd forgotten that entirely.
The stories -- these goddam stories -- the stories we tell ourselves become lies over time.
So, documentation helps cut through that.
It did move on to "We are as gods and might as well get good at it," and that was the Whole Earth Catalog.
By the time I was doing a book called "Whole Earth Discipline: An Ecopragmatist Manifesto," and in light of climate change, basically saying that we are as gods and have to get good at it.
CA: We are as gods and have to get good at it.
So talk about that, because the psychological reaction from so many people as soon as you talk about geoengineering is that the last thing they believe is that humans should be gods -- some of them for religious reasons, but most just for humility reasons, that the systems are too complex, we should not be dabbling that way.
SB: Well, this is the Greek narrative about hubris.
And once you start getting really sure of yourself, you wind up sleeping with your mother.
(Laughter) CA: I did not expect you would say that.
(Laughter) SB: That's the Oedipus story.
Hubris is a really important cautionary tale to always have at hand.
One of the guidelines I've kept for myself is: every day I ask myself how many things I am dead wrong about.
And I'm a scientist by training and getting to work with scientists these days, which is pure joy.
Science is organized skepticism.
So you're always insisting that even when something looks pretty good, you maintain a full set of not only suspicions about whether it's as good as it looks, but: What else is going on?
So this "What else is going?" on query, I think, is how you get away from fake news.
It's not necessarily real news, but it's welcomely more complex news that you're trying to take on.
CA: But coming back to the application of this just for the environment: it seems like the philosophy of this is that, whether we like it or not, we are already dominating so many aspects of what happens on planets, and we're doing it unintentionally, so we really should start doing it intentionally.
What would it look like to start getting good at being a god?
How should we start doing that?
Are there small-scale experiments or systems we can nudge and play with?
How on earth do we think about it?
SB: The mentor that sort of freed me from total allegiance to Buckminster Fuller was Gregory Bateson.
And Gregory Bateson was an epistemologist and anthropologist and biologist and psychologist and many other things, and he looked at how systems basically look at themselves.
And that is, I think, part of how you want to always be looking at things.
And what I like about David Keith's approach to geoengineering is you don't just haul off and do it.
David Keith's approach -- and this is what Danny Hillis was talking about earlier -- is that you do it really, really incrementally, you do some stuff to tweak the system, see how it responds, that tells you something about the system.
That's responding to the fact that people say, quite rightly, "What are we talking about here?
We don't understand how the climate system works.
You can't engineer a system you don't understand."
And David says, "Well, that certainly applies to the human body, and yet medicine goes ahead, and we're kind of glad that it has."
The way you engineer a system that is so large and complex that you can't completely understand it is you tweak it, and this is kind of an anti-hubristic approach.
This is: try a little bit here, back the hell off if it's an issue, expand it if it seems to go OK, meanwhile, have other paths going forward.
This is the whole argument for diversity and dialogue and all these other things and the things we were hearing about earlier with Sebastian [Thrun].
So the non-hubristic approach is looking for social license, which is a terminology that I think is a good one, of including society enough in these interesting, problematic, deep issues that they get to have a pretty good idea and have people that they trust paying close attention to the sequence of experiments as it's going forward, the public dialogue as it's going forward -- which is more public than ever, which is fantastic -- and you feel your way, you just ooze your way along, and this is the muddle-through approach that has worked pretty well so far.
The reason that Sebastian and I are optimistic is we read people like Steven Pinker, "The Better Angels of Our Nature," and so far, so good.
Now, that can always change, but you can build a lot on that sense of: things are capable of getting better, figure out the tools that made that happen and apply those further.
That's the story.
CA: Stewart, I think on that optimistic note, we're actually going to wrap up.
I am in awe of how you always are willing to challenge yourself and other people.
I feel like this recipe for never allowing yourself to be too certain is so powerful.
I want to learn it more for myself, and it's been very insightful and inspiring, actually, listening to you today.
Stewart Brand, thank you so much.
SB: Thank you.
(Applause)
I became obsessed with records when I was about 12 years old.
My parents used to give me money to eat and on most days, instead of eating, I would save it and buy myself a record at the end of the week.
Here I am with a gigantic Walkman that's about half my leg -- (Laughter) It actually looks more like a VCR.
(Laughter) So when I was a teenager, the obsession of buying cassettes, vinyls and CDs just kept growing.
I was even working in a record store for many years and only ever got paid in records.
One day I realized that I had thousands of records more than I could even listen to in my life.
I became what many of us are: record junkies -- or record diggers, as we like to call ourselves.
Record digging, as the name suggests, means getting your hands dirty.
It means spending hours rummaging through warehouses, church basements, yard sales, record stores -- all to find records that have been forgotten for decades.
Records that have become cultural waste.
The earliest record collectors from about the '30s to the 1960s found and preserved so many important records that would have been lost forever.
In those days, most cultural and public institutions didn't really care to preserve these treasures.
In many cases, they were just throwing them into the garbage.
Record digging is a lifestyle.
We're absolutely obsessed with obscure records, expensive records, dollar-bin records, crazy artwork, sub-subgenres.
And all of the tiniest details that go with each release.
When the media talks about the vinyl revival that's been happening these last few years, they often forget to mention this community that's been keeping the vinyl and the tradition and the culture alive for these last 30 years.
It's a very close-knit but competitive society, a little bit, because when you're hunting for extremely rare records, if you miss your opportunity, you might not see that record ever in your life.
But I guess the only person in here truly impressed by record collectors is another record collector.
To the outside world, we seem like a very weird, oddball group of individuals.
And -- (Laughter) And they're mostly right.
All the record collectors I know are obsessive maniacs.
We know we're all crazy in some way.
But I think we should be viewed a little bit more like this.
(Laughter) We're music archaeologists.
We're hunting down the lost artifact.
We all have a list of records that we would do anything to get our hands on, that we've been chasing for years, and we actually call this list our "holy grails."
When you're digging for records, you're surrounded by music you don't know.
You're surrounded by mystery and by all these dreams -- records that people once believed in.
Imagine the thousands of artists who were destined to be legends but for various reasons, were just overlooked.
Many of these records only exist in a handful of copies, and some have never even been found, never been heard.
They're literally endangered species.
I'll tell you a story that for me sort of sums up the value of the work of record diggers.
The story of a brilliant Montreal musician and composer.
Henri-Pierre Nol was born and raised in Haiti, but he lived briefly in the US and in Belgium.
He passed through Montreal what was supposed to be for two weeks, but he ended up staying for the next 40 years.
When he was young, he learned to play piano and developed a very particular way of playing his instrument: very fast and almost like a percussion.
His style was a mix of his Haitian influences and folklore mixed with the American influences that he grew up hearing.
So he created a mix of compas mixed with funk and jazz.
As a young man, he played and toured with live bands in the US and in Europe, but had never recorded an album or a song before moving to Canada.
It was in Montreal in 1979 that he released his first album called, "Piano."
Completely on his own, on Henri-Pierre Nol Records.
He only made what he could afford: 2,000 copies of the record.
The record received a little bit of airplay, a little bit of support in Canada and in Haiti, but without a big label behind it, it was very, very difficult.
Back then, if your record wasn't getting played on mainstream radio, if you weren't in jukeboxes or if you weren't invited to play on TV, the odds were completely against you.
Releasing an album as an independent artist was so much more difficult than it is today, both in terms of being heard and just distributing the thing.
So, soon after, he released a second album, kept a busy schedule playing piano in various clubs in the city, but his records started to accumulate dust slowly.
And those 2,000 copies in the span of 30 years easily started to get lost until only a few copies in the world remained.
Then in the mid-2000s, a Montreal record digger that goes by the name Kobal was doing his weekly rounds of just hunting for records.
He was in a flea market surrounded by thousands of other dirty, dusty, moldy records.
That's where he found the "Piano" album.
He wasn't specifically looking for it.
Actually, you could say it sort of found him.
You could also say that after 20 years of record digging every single week, he had developed a sixth sense for finding the gold.
He took the record and inspected it: the front, the artwork, the back, the liner notes, and he was intrigued by the fact that this Haitian musician made a record in Quebec in the late '70s, so he was intrigued.
He took out his little, plastic, portable turntable that he brought with him whenever he was on these digging quests and put the record on.
So why don't we do the same thing?
(Music) He fell in love with the music instantly, but he had to know the backstory behind it.
He didn't know where it came from.
He knew the artist, at the time of the recording, was living in Montreal, so for months, he tried to track him down.
He even found Nol's business card inside the record sleeve.
That's how DIY Henri-Pierre Nol was.
So he found the card inside the record sleeve -- of course he did try to call, but after 30 years, the number didn't work anymore.
So it was only in Belgium, where the artist had once lived, that Kobal managed to find someone that knew the artist personally and gave him the contact.
So when he finally sat down with the artist, he made him a promise to someday find a way to get the album rereleased.
He then arranged for a British label called Wah Wah 45s to get the two albums reissued.
And what happens very often is, in these reissue projects, that it becomes very difficult to find the master tapes -- the original recording of the sessions.
Art can be destroyed by fires, floods, earthquakes, thrown in the garbage, or just lost forever.
But thankfully, the Henri-Pierre Nol tapes were safe and they were ready for remastering.
The record was finally rereleased and received praise from music critics, DJs and listeners worldwide -- the praise that it should have received in 1979.
The artist was so inspired that he decided to revive his music career, get back on a stage, and play for new audiences.
The artist, now in his 60s, told me, "This changed everything for me.
I went from planning my retirement to playing on the BBC Radio in London, and on Radio Canada and more."
But also it gave him a chance to play in front of his three sons for the first time.
To me, this story shows perfectly the work of record diggers at its best.
Beyond the rarity and the dollar value -- and I'll be honest, we're totally obsessed by that -- the true beauty is to give art a second chance; to save art from oblivion.
The work of a good record digger is a constant loop of three phases.
The first thing we do is hunt.
We spend hours, days, years of our lives rummaging through dirty and dusty record bins.
Everything that we can do to find our hands on the gold.
Yes, you can find good records online, but for the deepest treasures, you need to get off the couch and into the wild.
That's why we call it record digging and not record clicking.
(Laughter) So what we are is music archaeologists.
But then the next thing we do is we gather.
Based on our taste, expertise, personal agenda, we choose carefully which records to save, which records mean something to us.
We then try and find out every little thing we can about that record -- the artist, the label and supervital information like "Who's that playing trumpet on track three?"
Then we file them, we contextualize them, and we keep them safe.
We are music archivists.
And the last thing we do to close the loop is we share.
Most record diggers that I know have some sort of a way to share their discovery and elevate the artist through an album reissue, a web article, a radio show.
We give records back their rightful place in music history.
We are tastemakers and curators.
So for myself and most of the record collectors I've encountered in 20 years, I think that we all have some sort of an outlet for these discoveries.
I think it's our way to keep our sanity and sort of sense of purpose in this very maddening obsession, because it can be sort of a lonely one.
But I think we also do it because it serves the human need to pass along cultural knowledge.
Speaking of the need for curation, in an era of overwhelming choice, it's been demonstrated that too much choice actually hinders discovery.
For example, if you're trying to watch something on Netflix, you're actually only browsing through a catalog of 6,000 titles.
Now, compare that with Spotify; if you want to pick something to listen to, you're browsing through a catalog of 30 million songs.
So I think as you can see, this notion of paralysis by choice affects music more than movies, for example.
And there's a few studies that are starting to show the effects of this.
A recent look at the UK music market shows that the top one percent of artists in the UK are actually earning 77 percent of the total revenues inside the music industry.
That's 2013, and that's progressively getting worse, or progressing.
Anyway, if you're in the one percent, I'm sure you're happy.
(Laughter) So the takeaway for me is it's easier for people to listen to music than ever before.
People have more music at their disposal than ever before, yet people choose to listen to more of the same music than ever before.
And that's a sad thing.
Inspired by my love for music research, record digging and curation, I started a website called "Music Is My Sanctuary" in 2007.
Our slogan has always been "Future Classics and Forgotten Treasures."
And it shows our love for discovering music and introducing music both old and new.
From humble beginnings, we've built a worldwide platform with a massive audience with over 100 collaborators.
We've created over 10,000 pieces of content, over 500 hours of audio content.
Our audience consists of people who just want more than what's being offered to them by mainstream music channels.
They want to do -- they want to dig deeper, but they don't necessarily have 20 hours a week like us nerds, so they trust us to do that for them.
Curation is at the heart of everything we do.
We believe in human recommendations over algorithms.
I could talk about the passion of record digging for days, but let me conclude this way.
After many years of doing it, a record collector's collection becomes sort of his autobiography.
Last year, I was DJ-ing in Poland, and the people that were hosting me, they had this amazing record collection, and of course I was intrigued and I said, "Are you selling these?"
They then explained to me that it was the collection that belonged to their dear friend Maceo who passed away a few months earlier.
And they were doing a project of inviting different people to take the collection and to create something new from it, whether it's sampling or DJ mixes, you know, just to give it a second life.
And so after a few hours of going through the collection myself and creating a DJ mix from it, even though I never got the chance to meet him, it felt like in a special way, me and him, we got to talk about records for a few hours.
So, as record diggers, our work and our record collections are there to be passed on to the next generation.
Beautiful art deserves to be cherished, shared and rediscovered.
Embrace curators; we are alternative voices to the mainstream music channels, digital or otherwise.
Go beyond the algorithm.
Whatever kind of music you like, there are so many websites, radio shows, DJs, record stores out there that are just waiting to share their discoveries with you.
We do this work for you.
All you have to do is open your ears and take risks.
This music will change your life.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The creative process -- you know this -- from the first idea to the final product, is a long process.
It's super-iterative, lots of refinement, blood, sweat, tears and years.
And we're not saying you're going to go out for a walk and come back with the Sistine Chapel in your left hand.
So what frame of the creative process did we focus on?
Just this first part.
Just brainstorming, coming up with a new idea.
We actually ran four studies with a variety of people.
You were either walking indoors or outdoors.
And all of these studies found the same conclusion.
I'm only going to tell you about one of them today.
One of the tests we used for creativity was alternate uses.
In this test, you have four minutes.
Your job is to come up with as many other ways to use common everyday objects as you can think of.
So, for example, what else would you do with a key, other than to use it for opening up a lock?
Clearly, you could use it as a third eyeball for a giraffe, right?
Maybe. That's sort of interesting, kind of new. But is it creative?
So people came up with as many ideas as they could, and we had to decide: Is this creative or not?
The definition of creativity that a lot of people go with is "appropriate novelty."
For something to be appropriate, it has to be realistic, so unfortunately, you can't use a key as an eyeball.
Boo!
But "novel," the second thing, is that nobody had to have said it.
So for us, it had to be appropriate first, and then for novelty, nobody else in the entire population that we surveyed could have said it.
So you might think you could use a key to scratch somebody's car, but if somebody else said that, you didn't get credit for it.
However, only one person said this: "If you were dying and it were a murder mystery, and you had to carve the name of the murderer into the ground with your dying words."
One person said this.
(Laughter) And it's a creative idea, because it's appropriate and it's novel.
You either did this test and came up with ideas while you were seated or while you were walking on a treadmill.
(Laughter) They did the test twice, with different objects.
Three groups: the first group sat first and then sat again for the second test.
The second group sat first and then did the second test while walking on a treadmill.
The third group -- and this is interesting -- they walked on the treadmill first, and then they sat.
OK, so the two groups that sat together for the first test, they looked pretty similar to each other, and they averaged about 20 creative ideas per person.
The group that was walking on the treadmill did almost twice as well.
And they were just walking on a treadmill in a windowless room.
Remember, they took the test twice.
The people who sat twice for that second test didn't get any better; practice didn't help.
But these same people who were sitting and then went on the treadmill got a boost from walking.
Here's the interesting thing.
The people who were walking on the treadmill still had a residue effect of the walking, and they were still creative afterwards.
So the implication of this is that you should go for a walk before your next big meeting and just start brainstorming right away.
We have five tips for you that will help make this the best effect possible.
First, you want to pick a problem or a topic to brainstorm.
So, this is not the shower effect, when you're in the shower and all of a sudden, a new idea pops out of the shampoo bottle.
They're intentionally thinking about brainstorming a different perspective on the walk.
Secondly -- I get asked this a lot: Is this OK while running?
Well, the answer for me is that if I were running, the only new idea I would have would be to stop running, so ...
(Laughter) But if running for you is a comfortable pace, good.
It turns out, whatever physical activity is not taking a lot of attention.
So just walking at a comfortable pace is a good choice.
Also, you want to come up with as many ideas as you can.
One key of creativity is to not lock on that first idea.
Keep going.
Keep coming up with new ones, until you pick one or two to pursue.
You might worry that you don't want to write them down, because what if you forget them?
So the idea here is to speak them.
Everybody was speaking their new ideas.
So you can put your headphones on and record through your phone and then just pretend you're having a creative conversation, right?
Because the act of writing your idea down is already a filter.
You're going to be like, "Is this good enough to write down?"
And then you write it down.
And finally: don't do this forever. Right?
If you're on the walk and that idea's not coming to you, come back to it later at another time.
I think we're coming up on a break right now, so I have an idea: Why don't you grab a leash and take your thoughts for a walk?
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I want to talk today about an idea. It's a big idea.
Actually, I think it'll eventually be seen as probably the single biggest idea that's emerged in the past century.
It's the idea of computation.
Now, of course, that idea has brought us all of the computer technology we have today and so on.
But there's actually a lot more to computation than that.
It's really a very deep, very powerful, very fundamental idea, whose effects we've only just begun to see.
Well, I myself have spent the past 30 years of my life working on three large projects that really try to take the idea of computation seriously.
So I started off at a young age as a physicist using computers as tools.
Then, I started drilling down, thinking about the computations I might want to do, trying to figure out what primitives they could be built up from and how they could be automated as much as possible.
Eventually, I created a whole structure based on symbolic programming and so on that let me build Mathematica.
And for the past 23 years, at an increasing rate, we've been pouring more and more ideas and capabilities and so on into Mathematica, and I'm happy to say that that's led to many good things in R &amp; D and education, lots of other areas.
Well, I have to admit, actually, that I also had a very selfish reason for building Mathematica: I wanted to use it myself, a bit like Galileo got to use his telescope 400 years ago.
But I wanted to look not at the astronomical universe, but at the computational universe.
So we normally think of programs as being complicated things that we build for very specific purposes.
But what about the space of all possible programs?
Here's a representation of a really simple program.
So, if we run this program, this is what we get.
Very simple.
So let's try changing the rule for this program a little bit.
Now we get another result, still very simple.
Try changing it again.
You get something a little bit more complicated.
But if we keep running this for a while, we find out that although the pattern we get is very intricate, it has a very regular structure.
So the question is: Can anything else happen?
Well, we can do a little experiment.
Let's just do a little mathematical experiment, try and find out.
Let's just run all possible programs of the particular type that we're looking at.
They're called cellular automata.
You can see a lot of diversity in the behavior here.
Most of them do very simple things, but if you look along all these different pictures, at rule number 30, you start to see something interesting going on.
So let's take a closer look at rule number 30 here.
So here it is.
We're just following this very simple rule at the bottom here, but we're getting all this amazing stuff.
It's not at all what we're used to, and I must say that, when I first saw this, it came as a huge shock to my intuition.
And, in fact, to understand it, I eventually had to create a whole new kind of science.
(Laughter) This science is different, more general, than the mathematics-based science that we've had for the past 300 or so years.
You know, it's always seemed like a big mystery: how nature, seemingly so effortlessly, manages to produce so much that seems to us so complex.
Well, I think we've found its secret: It's just sampling what's out there in the computational universe and quite often getting things like Rule 30 or like this.
And knowing that starts to explain a lot of long-standing mysteries in science.
It also brings up new issues, though, like computational irreducibility.
I mean, we're used to having science let us predict things, but something like this is fundamentally irreducible.
The only way to find its outcome is, effectively, just to watch it evolve.
It's connected to, what I call, the principle of computational equivalence, which tells us that even incredibly simple systems can do computations as sophisticated as anything.
It doesn't take lots of technology or biological evolution to be able to do arbitrary computation; just something that happens, naturally, all over the place.
Things with rules as simple as these can do it.
Well, this has deep implications about the limits of science, about predictability and controllability of things like biological processes or economies, about intelligence in the universe, about questions like free will and about creating technology.
You know, in working on this science for many years, I kept wondering, "What will be its first killer app?"
Well, ever since I was a kid, I'd been thinking about systematizing knowledge and somehow making it computable.
People like Leibniz had wondered about that too 300 years earlier.
But I'd always assumed that to make progress, I'd essentially have to replicate a whole brain.
Well, then I got to thinking: This scientific paradigm of mine suggests something different -- and, by the way, I've now got huge computation capabilities in Mathematica, and I'm a CEO with some worldly resources to do large, seemingly crazy, projects -- So I decided to just try to see how much of the systematic knowledge that's out there in the world we could make computable.
So, it's been a big, very complex project, which I was not sure was going to work at all.
But I'm happy to say it's actually going really well.
And last year we were able to release the first website version of Wolfram Alpha.
Its purpose is to be a serious knowledge engine that computes answers to questions.
So let's give it a try.
Let's start off with something really easy.
Hope for the best.
Very good. Okay.
So far so good.
(Laughter) Let's try something a little bit harder.
Let's do some mathy thing, and with luck it'll work out the answer and try and tell us some interesting things things about related math.
We could ask it something about the real world.
Let's say -- I don't know -- what's the GDP of Spain?
And it should be able to tell us that.
Now we could compute something related to this, let's say ... the GDP of Spain divided by, I don't know, the -- hmmm ...
let's say the revenue of Microsoft.
(Laughter) The idea is that we can just type this in, this kind of question in, however we think of it.
So let's try asking a question, like a health related question.
So let's say we have a lab finding that ...
you know, we have an LDL level of 140 for a male aged 50.
So let's type that in, and now Wolfram Alpha will go and use available public health data and try and figure out what part of the population that corresponds to and so on.
Or let's try asking about, I don't know, the International Space Station.
And what's happening here is that Wolfram Alpha is not just looking up something; it's computing, in real time, where the International Space Station is right now at this moment, how fast it's going, and so on.
So Wolfram Alpha knows about lots and lots of kinds of things.
It's got, by now, pretty good coverage of everything you might find in a standard reference library.
But the goal is to go much further and, very broadly, to democratize all of this knowledge, and to try and be an authoritative source in all areas.
To be able to compute answers to specific questions that people have, not by searching what other people may have written down before, but by using built in knowledge to compute fresh new answers to specific questions.
Now, of course, Wolfram Alpha is a monumentally huge, long-term project with lots and lots of challenges.
For a start, one has to curate a zillion different sources of facts and data, and we built quite a pipeline of Mathematica automation and human domain experts for doing this.
But that's just the beginning.
Given raw facts or data to actually answer questions, one has to compute: one has to implement all those methods and models and algorithms and so on that science and other areas have built up over the centuries.
Well, even starting from Mathematica, this is still a huge amount of work.
So far, there are about 8 million lines of Mathematica code in Wolfram Alpha built by experts from many, many different fields.
Well, a crucial idea of Wolfram Alpha is that you can just ask it questions using ordinary human language, which means that we've got to be able to take all those strange utterances that people type into the input field and understand them.
And I must say that I thought that step might just be plain impossible.
Two big things happened: First, a bunch of new ideas about linguistics that came from studying the computational universe; and second, the realization that having actual computable knowledge completely changes how one can set about understanding language.
And, of course, now with Wolfram Alpha actually out in the wild, we can learn from its actual usage.
And, in fact, there's been an interesting coevolution that's been going on between Wolfram Alpha and its human users, and it's really encouraging.
Right now, if we look at web queries, more than 80 percent of them get handled successfully the first time.
And if you look at things like the iPhone app, the fraction is considerably larger.
So, I'm pretty pleased with it all.
But, in many ways, we're still at the very beginning with Wolfram Alpha.
I mean, everything is scaling up very nicely and we're getting more confident.
You can expect to see Wolfram Alpha technology showing up in more and more places, working both with this kind of public data, like on the website, and with private knowledge for people and companies and so on.
You know, I've realized that Wolfram Alpha actually gives one a whole new kind of computing that one can call knowledge-based computing, in which one's starting not just from raw computation, but from a vast amount of built-in knowledge.
And when one does that, one really changes the economics of delivering computational things, whether it's on the web or elsewhere.
You know, we have a fairly interesting situation right now.
On the one hand, we have Mathematica, with its sort of precise, formal language and a huge network of carefully designed capabilities able to get a lot done in just a few lines.
Let me show you a couple of examples here.
So here's a trivial piece of Mathematica programming.
Here's something where we're sort of integrating a bunch of different capabilities here.
Here we'll just create, in this line, a little user interface that allows us to do something fun there.
If you go on, that's a slightly more complicated program that's now doing all sorts of algorithmic things and creating user interface and so on.
But it's something that is very precise stuff.
It's a precise specification with a precise formal language that causes Mathematica to know what to do here.
Then on the other hand, we have Wolfram Alpha, with all the messiness of the world and human language and so on built into it.
So what happens when you put these things together?
I think it's actually rather wonderful.
With Wolfram Alpha inside Mathematica, you can, for example, make precise programs that call on real world data.
Here's a real simple example.
You can also just sort of give vague input and then try and have Wolfram Alpha figure out what you're talking about.
Let's try this here.
But actually I think the most exciting thing about this is that it really gives one the chance to democratize programming.
I mean, anyone will be able to say what they want in plain language.
Then, the idea is that Wolfram Alpha will be able to figure out what precise pieces of code can do what they're asking for and then show them examples that will let them pick what they need to build up bigger and bigger, precise programs.
So, sometimes, Wolfram Alpha will be able to do the whole thing immediately and just give back a whole big program that you can then compute with.
Here's a big website where we've been collecting lots of educational and other demonstrations about lots of kinds of things.
I'll show you one example here.
This is just an example of one of these computable documents.
This is probably a fairly small piece of Mathematica code that's able to be run here.
Okay. Let's zoom out again.
So, given our new kind of science, is there a general way to use it to make technology?
So, with physical materials, we're used to going around the world and discovering that particular materials are useful for particular technological purposes.
Well, it turns out we can do very much the same kind of thing in the computational universe.
There's an inexhaustible supply of programs out there.
The challenge is to see how to harness them for human purposes.
Something like Rule 30, for example, turns out to be a really good randomness generator.
Other simple programs are good models for processes in the natural or social world.
And, for example, Wolfram Alpha and Mathematica are actually now full of algorithms that we discovered by searching the computational universe.
And, for example, this -- if we go back here -- this has become surprisingly popular among composers finding musical forms by searching the computational universe.
In a sense, we can use the computational universe to get mass customized creativity.
I'm hoping we can, for example, use that even to get Wolfram Alpha to routinely do invention and discovery on the fly, and to find all sorts of wonderful stuff that no engineer and no process of incremental evolution would ever come up with.
Well, so, that leads to kind of an ultimate question: Could it be that someplace out there in the computational universe we might find our physical universe?
Perhaps there's even some quite simple rule, some simple program for our universe.
Well, the history of physics would have us believe that the rule for the universe must be pretty complicated.
But in the computational universe, we've now seen how rules that are incredibly simple can produce incredibly rich and complex behavior.
So could that be what's going on with our whole universe?
If the rules for the universe are simple, it's kind of inevitable that they have to be very abstract and very low level; operating, for example, far below the level of space or time, which makes it hard to represent things.
But in at least a large class of cases, one can think of the universe as being like some kind of network, which, when it gets big enough, behaves like continuous space in much the same way as having lots of molecules can behave like a continuous fluid.
Well, then the universe has to evolve by applying little rules that progressively update this network.
And each possible rule, in a sense, corresponds to a candidate universe.
Actually, I haven't shown these before, but here are a few of the candidate universes that I've looked at.
Some of these are hopeless universes, completely sterile, with other kinds of pathologies like no notion of space, no notion of time, no matter, other problems like that.
But the exciting thing that I've found in the last few years is that you actually don't have to go very far in the computational universe before you start finding candidate universes that aren't obviously not our universe.
Here's the problem: Any serious candidate for our universe is inevitably full of computational irreducibility.
Which means that it is irreducibly difficult to find out how it will really behave, and whether it matches our physical universe.
A few years ago, I was pretty excited to discover that there are candidate universes with incredibly simple rules that successfully reproduce special relativity, and even general relativity and gravitation, and at least give hints of quantum mechanics.
So, will we find the whole of physics?
I don't know for sure, but I think at this point it's sort of almost embarrassing not to at least try.
Not an easy project.
One's got to build a lot of technology.
One's got to build a structure that's probably at least as deep as existing physics.
And I'm not sure what the best way to organize the whole thing is.
Build a team, open it up, offer prizes and so on.
But I'll tell you, here today, that I'm committed to seeing this project done, to see if, within this decade, we can finally hold in our hands the rule for our universe and know where our universe lies in the space of all possible universes ...
and be able to type into Wolfram Alpha, "the theory of the universe," and have it tell us.
(Laughter) So I've been working on the idea of computation now for more than 30 years, building tools and methods and turning intellectual ideas into millions of lines of code and grist for server farms and so on.
With every passing year, I realize how much more powerful the idea of computation really is.
It's taken us a long way already, but there's so much more to come.
From the foundations of science to the limits of technology to the very definition of the human condition, I think computation is destined to be the defining idea of our future.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: That was astonishing.
Stay here. I've got a question.
(Applause) So, that was, fair to say, an astonishing talk.
Are you able to say in a sentence or two how this type of thinking could integrate at some point to things like string theory or the kind of things that people think of as the fundamental explanations of the universe?
Stephen Wolfram: Well, the parts of physics that we kind of know to be true, things like the standard model of physics: what I'm trying to do better reproduce the standard model of physics or it's simply wrong.
The things that people have tried to do in the last 25 years or so with string theory and so on have been an interesting exploration that has tried to get back to the standard model, but hasn't quite gotten there.
My guess is that some great simplifications of what I'm doing may actually have considerable resonance with what's been done in string theory, but that's a complicated math thing that I don't yet know how it's going to work out.
CA: Benoit Mandelbrot is in the audience.
He also has shown how complexity can arise out of a simple start.
Does your work relate to his?
SW: I think so.
I view Benoit Mandelbrot's work as one of the founding contributions to this kind of area.
Benoit has been particularly interested in nested patterns, in fractals and so on, where the structure is something that's kind of tree-like, and where there's sort of a big branch that makes little branches and even smaller branches and so on.
That's one of the ways that you get towards true complexity.
I think things like the Rule 30 cellular automaton get us to a different level.
In fact, in a very precise way, they get us to a different level because they seem to be things that are capable of complexity that's sort of as great as complexity can ever get ...
I could go on about this at great length, but I won't. (Laughter) (Applause) CA: Stephen Wolfram, thank you.
(Applause)
Hi, my name is Roz Savage and I row across oceans.
Four years ago, I rowed solo across the Atlantic, and since then, I've done two out of three stages across the Pacific, from San Francisco to Hawaii and from Hawaii to Kiribati.
And tomorrow, I'll be leaving this boat to fly back to Kiribati to continue with the third and final stage of my row across the Pacific.
Cumulatively, I will have rowed over 8,000 miles, taken over three million oar strokes and spent more than 312 days alone on the ocean on a 23 foot rowboat.
This has given me a very special relationship with the ocean.
We have a bit of a love/hate thing going on.
I feel a bit about it like I did about a very strict math teacher that I once had at school.
I didn't always like her, but I did respect her, and she taught me a heck of a lot.
So today I'd like to share with you some of my ocean adventures and tell you a little bit about what they've taught me, and how I think we can maybe take some of those lessons and apply them to this environmental challenge that we face right now.
Now, some of you might be thinking, "Hold on a minute. She doesn't look very much like an ocean rower.
Isn't she meant to be about this tall and about this wide and maybe look a bit more like these guys?"
You'll notice, they've all got something that I don't.
Well, I don't know what you're thinking, but I'm talking about the beards. (Laughter) And no matter how long I've spent on the ocean, I haven't yet managed to muster a decent beard, and I hope that it remains that way.
For a long time, I didn't believe that I could have a big adventure.
The story that I told myself was that adventurers looked like this.
I didn't look the part.
I thought there were them and there were us, and I was not one of them.
So for 11 years, I conformed.
I did what people from my kind of background were supposed to do.
I was working in an office in London as a management consultant.
And I think I knew from day one that it wasn't the right job for me.
But that kind of conditioning just kept me there for so many years, until I reached my mid-30s and I thought, "You know, I'm not getting any younger.
I feel like I've got a purpose in this life, and I don't know what it is, but I'm pretty certain that management consultancy is not it.
So, fast forward a few years.
I'd gone through some changes.
To try and answer that question of, "What am I supposed to be doing with my life?"
I sat down one day and wrote two versions of my own obituary, the one that I wanted, a life of adventure, and the one that I was actually heading for which was a nice, normal, pleasant life, but it wasn't where I wanted to be by the end of my life.
I wanted to live a life that I could be proud of.
And I remember looking at these two versions of my obituary and thinking, "Oh boy, I'm on totally the wrong track here.
If I carry on living as I am now, I'm just not going to end up where I want to be in five years, or 10 years, or at the end of my life."
I made a few changes, let go of some loose trappings of my old life, and through a bit of a leap of logic, decided to row across the Atlantic Ocean.
(Laughter) The Atlantic Rowing Race runs from the Canaries to Antigua, it's about 3,000 miles, and it turned out to be the hardest thing I had ever done.
Sure, I had wanted to get outside of my comfort zone, but what I'd sort of failed to notice was that getting out of your comfort zone is, by definition, extremely uncomfortable.
And my timing was not great either: 2005, when I did the Atlantic, was the year of Hurricane Katrina.
There were more tropical storms in the North Atlantic than ever before, since records began.
And pretty early on, those storms started making their presence known.
All four of my oars broke before I reached halfway across.
Oars are not supposed to look like this.
But what can you do? You're in the middle of the ocean.
Oars are your only means of propulsion.
So I just had to look around the boat and figure out what I was going to use to fix up these oars so that I could carry on.
So I found a boat hook and my trusty duct tape and splintered the boat hook to the oars to reinforce it.
Then, when that gave out, I sawed the wheel axles off my spare rowing seat and used those.
And then when those gave out, I cannibalized one of the broken oars.
I'd never been very good at fixing stuff when I was living my old life, but it's amazing how resourceful you can become when you're in the middle of the ocean and there's only one way to get to the other side.
And the oars kind of became a symbol of just in how many ways I went beyond what I thought were my limits.
I suffered from tendinitis on my shoulders and saltwater sores on my bottom.
I really struggled psychologically, totally overwhelmed by the scale of the challenge, realizing that, if I carried on moving at two miles an hour, 3,000 miles was going to take me a very, very long time.
There were so many times when I thought I'd hit that limit, but had no choice but to just carry on and try and figure out how I was going to get to the other side without driving myself crazy.
And eventually after 103 days at sea, I arrived in Antigua.
I don't think I've ever felt so happy in my entire life.
It was a bit like finishing a marathon and getting out of solitary confinement and winning an Oscar all rolled into one.
I was euphoric.
And to see all the people coming out to greet me and standing along the cliff tops and clapping and cheering, I just felt like a movie star.
It was absolutely wonderful.
And I really learned then that, the bigger the challenge, the bigger the sense of achievement when you get to the end of it.
So this might be a good moment to take a quick time-out to answer a few FAQs about ocean rowing that might be going through your mind.
Number one that I get asked: What do you eat?
A few freeze-dried meals, but mostly I try and eat much more unprocessed foods.
So I grow my own beansprouts.
I eat fruits and nut bars, a lot of nuts.
And generally arrive about 30 pounds lighter at the other end.
Question number two: How do you sleep?
With my eyes shut. Ha-ha.
I suppose what you mean is: What happens to the boat while I'm sleeping?
Well, I plan my route so that I'm drifting with the winds and the currents while I'm sleeping.
On a good night, I think my best ever was 11 miles in the right direction.
Worst ever, 13 miles in the wrong direction.
That's a bad day at the office.
What do I wear?
Mostly, a baseball cap, rowing gloves and a smile -- or a frown, depending on whether I went backwards overnight -- and lots of sun lotion.
Do I have a chase boat?
No I don't. I'm totally self-supporting out there.
I don't see anybody for the whole time that I'm at sea, generally.
And finally: Am I crazy?
Well, I leave that one up to you to judge.
So, how do you top rowing across the Atlantic?
Well, naturally, you decide to row across the Pacific.
Well, I thought the Atlantic was big, but the Pacific is really, really big.
I think we tend to do it a little bit of a disservice in our usual maps.
I don't know for sure that the Brits invented this particular view of the world, but I suspect we might have done so: we are right in the middle, and we've cut the Pacific in half and flung it to the far corners of the world.
Whereas if you look in Google Earth, this is how the Pacific looks.
It pretty much covers half the planet.
You can just see a little bit of North America up here and a sliver of Australia down there.
It is really big -- 65 million square miles -- and to row in a straight line across it would be about 8,000 miles.
Unfortunately, ocean rowboats very rarely go in a straight line.
By the time I get to Australia, if I get to Australia, I will have rowed probably nine or 10,000 miles in all.
So, because nobody in their straight mind would row straight past Hawaii without dropping in, I decided to cut this very big undertaking into three segments.
The first attempt didn't go so well.
In 2007, I did a rather involuntary capsize drill three times in 24 hours.
A bit like being in a washing machine.
Boat got a bit dinged up, so did I.
I blogged about it. Unfortunately, somebody with a bit of a hero complex decided that this damsel was in distress and needed saving.
The first I knew about this was when the Coast Guard plane turned up overhead.
I tried to tell them to go away.
We had a bit of a battle of wills.
I lost and got airlifted.
Awful, really awful.
It was one of the worst feelings of my life, as I was lifted up on that winch line into the helicopter and looked down at my trusty little boat rolling around in the 20 foot waves and wondering if I would ever see her again.
So I had to launch a very expensive salvage operation and then wait another nine months before I could get back out onto the ocean again.
But what do you do?
Fall down nine times, get up 10.
So, the following year, I set out and, fortunately, this time made it safely across to Hawaii.
But it was not without misadventure.
My watermaker broke, only the most important piece of kit that I have on the boat.
Powered by my solar panels, it sucks in saltwater and turns it into freshwater.
But it doesn't react very well to being immersed in ocean, which is what happened to it.
Fortunately, help was at hand.
There was another unusual boat out there at the same time, doing as I was doing, bringing awareness to the North Pacific Garbage Patch, that area in the North Pacific about twice the size of Texas, with an estimated 3.5 million tons of trash in it, circulating at the center of that North Pacific Gyre.
So, to make the point, these guys had actually built their boat out of plastic trash, 15,000 empty water bottles latched together into two pontoons.
They were going very slowly.
Partly, they'd had a bit of a delay.
They'd had to pull in at Catalina Island shortly after they left Long Beach because the lids of all the water bottles were coming undone, and they were starting to sink.
So they'd had to pull in and do all the lids up.
But, as I was approaching the end of my water reserves, luckily, our courses were converging.
They were running out of food; I was running out of water.
So we liaised by satellite phone and arranged to meet up.
And it took about a week for us to actually gradually converge.
I was doing a pathetically slow speed of about 1.3 knots, and they were doing only marginally less pathetic speed of about 1.4: it was like two snails in a mating dance.
But, eventually, we did manage to meet up and Joel hopped overboard, caught us a beautiful, big mahi-mahi, which was the best food I'd had in, ooh, at least three months.
Fortunately, the one that he caught that day was better than this one they caught a few weeks earlier.
When they opened this one up, they found its stomach was full of plastic.
And this is really bad news because plastic is not an inert substance.
It leaches out chemicals into the flesh of the poor critter that ate it, and then we come along and eat that poor critter, and we get some of the toxins accumulating in our bodies as well.
So there are very real implications for human health.
I eventually made it to Hawaii still alive.
And, the following year, set out on the second stage of the Pacific, from Hawaii down to Tarawa.
And you'll notice something about Tarawa; it is very low-lying.
It's that little green sliver on the horizon, which makes them very nervous about rising oceans.
This is big trouble for these guys.
They've got no points of land more than about six feet above sea level.
And also, as an increase in extreme weather events due to climate change, they're expecting more waves to come in over the fringing reef, which will contaminate their fresh water supply.
I had a meeting with the president there, who told me about his exit strategy for his country.
He expects that within the next 50 years, the 100,000 people that live there will have to relocate to New Zealand or Australia.
And that made me think about how would I feel if Britain was going to disappear under the waves; if the places where I'd been born and gone to school and got married, if all those places were just going to disappear forever.
How, literally, ungrounded that would make me feel.
Very shortly, I'll be setting out to try and get to Australia, and if I'm successful, I'll be the first woman ever to row solo all the way across the Pacific.
And I try to use this to bring awareness to these environmental issues, to bring a human face to the ocean.
If the Atlantic was about my inner journey, discovering my own capabilities, maybe the Pacific has been about my outer journey, figuring out how I can use my interesting career choice to be of service to the world, and to take some of those things that I've learned out there and apply them to the situation that humankind now finds itself in.
I think there are probably three key points here.
The first one is about the stories that we tell ourselves.
For so long, I told myself that I couldn't have an adventure because I wasn't six foot tall and athletic and bearded.
And then that story changed.
I found out that people had rowed across oceans.
I even met one of them and she was just about my size.
So even though I didn't grow any taller, I didn't sprout a beard, something had changed: My interior dialogue had changed.
At the moment, the story that we collectively tell ourselves is that we need all this stuff, that we need oil.
But what about if we just change that story?
We do have alternatives, and we have the power of free will to choose those alternatives, those sustainable ones, to create a greener future.
The second point is about the accumulation of tiny actions.
We might think that anything that we do as an individual is just a drop in the ocean, that it can't really make a difference.
But it does. Generally, we haven't got ourselves into this mess through big disasters.
Yes, there have been the Exxon Valdezes and the Chernobyls, but mostly it's been an accumulation of bad decisions by billions of individuals, day after day and year after year.
And, by the same token, we can turn that tide.
We can start making better, wiser, more sustainable decisions.
And when we do that, we're not just one person.
Anything that we do spreads ripples.
Other people will see if you're in the supermarket line and you pull out your reusable grocery bag.
Maybe if we all start doing this, we can make it socially unacceptable to say yes to plastic in the checkout line.
That's just one example.
This is a world-wide community.
The other point: It's about taking responsibility.
For so much of my life, I wanted something else to make me happy.
I thought if I had the right house or the right car or the right man in my life, then I could be happy.
But when I wrote that obituary exercise, I actually grew up a little bit in that moment and realized that I needed to create my own future.
I couldn't just wait passively for happiness to come and find me.
And I suppose I'm a selfish environmentalist.
I plan on being around for a long time, and when I'm 90 years old, I want to be happy and healthy.
And it's very difficult to be happy on a planet that's racked with famine and drought.
It's very difficult to be healthy on a planet where we've poisoned the earth and the sea and the air.
So, shortly, I'm going to be launching a new initiative called Eco-Heroes.
And the idea here is that all our Eco-Heroes will log at least one green deed every day.
It's meant to be a bit of a game.
We're going to make an iPhone app out of it.
We just want to try and create that awareness because, sure, changing a light bulb isn't going to change the world, but that attitude, that awareness that leads you to change the light bulb or take your reusable coffee mug, that is what could change the world.
I really believe that we stand at a very important point in history.
We have a choice. We've been blessed, or cursed, with free will.
We can choose a greener future, and we can get there if we all pull together to take it one stroke at a time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Most of the talks that you've heard in the last several fabulous days have been from people who have the characteristic that they have thought about something, they are experts, they know what's going on.
All of you know about the topic that I'm supposed to talk about.
That is, you know what simplicity is, you know what complexity is.
The trouble is, I don't.
And what I'm going to do is share with you my ignorance on this subject.
I want you to read this, because we're going to come back to it in a moment.
The quote is from the fabled Potter Stewart opinion on pornography.
And let me just read it, the important details here: "Shorthand description, ['hardcore pornography']; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly defining it.
But I know it when I see it."
I'm going to come back to that in a moment.
So, what is simplicity?
It's good to start with some examples.
A coffee cup -- we don't think about coffee cups, but it's much more interesting than one might think -- a coffee cup is a device, which has a container and a handle.
The handle enables you to hold it when the container is filled with hot liquid.
Why is that important?
Well, it enables you to drink coffee.
But also, by the way, the coffee is hot, the liquid is sterile; you're not likely to get cholera that way.
So the coffee cup, or the cup with a handle, is one of the tools used by society to maintain public health.
Scissors are your clothes, glasses enable you to see things and keep you from being eaten by cheetahs or run down by automobiles, and books are, after all, your education.
But there's another class of simple things, which are also very important.
Simple in function, but not at all simple in how they're constructed.
And the two here are just examples.
One is the cellphone, which we use every day.
And it rests on a complexity, which has some characteristics very different from those that my friend Benoit Mandelbrot discussed, but are very interesting.
And the other, of course, is a birth control pill, which, in a very simple way, fundamentally changed the structure of society by changing the role of women in it by providing to them the opportunity to make reproductive choices.
So, there are two ways of thinking about this word, I think.
And here I've corrupted the Potter Stewart quotation by saying that we can think about something -- which spans all the way from scissors to the cell phone, Internet and birth control pills -- by saying that they're simple, the functions are simple, and we recognize what that simplicity is when we see it.
Or there may be another way of doing it, which is to think about the problem in terms of what -- if you associate with moral philosophers -- is called the teapot problem.
The teapot problem I'll pose this way.
Suppose you see a teapot, and the teapot is filled with hot water.
And you then ask the question: Why is the water hot?
And that's a simple question.
It's like, what is simplicity?
One answer would be: because the kinetic energy of the water molecules is high and they bounce against things rapidly -- that's a kind of physical science argument.
A second argument would be: because it was sitting on a stove with the flame on -- that's an historical argument.
A third is that I wanted hot water for tea -- that's an intentional argument.
And, since this is coming from a moral philosopher, the fourth would be that it's part of God's plan for the universe.
All of these are possibilities.
The point is that you get into trouble when you ask a single question with a single box for an answer, in which that single question actually is many questions with quite different meanings, but with the same words.
Asking, "What is simplicity?" I think falls in that category.
What is the state of science?
And, interestingly, complexity is very highly evolved.
We have a lot of interesting information about what complexity is.
Simplicity, for reasons that are a little bit obscure, is almost not pursued, at least in the academic world.
We academics -- I am an academic -- we love complexity.
You can write papers about complexity, and the nice thing about complexity is it's fundamentally intractable in many ways, so you're not responsible for outcomes. (Laughter) Simplicity -- all of you really would like your Waring Blender in the morning to make whatever a Waring Blender does, but not explode or play Beethoven.
You're not interested in the limits of these things.
So what one is interested in has a lot to do with the rewards of the system.
And there's a lot of rewards in thinking about complexity and emergence, not so much in thinking about simplicity.
One of the things I want to do is to help you with a very important task -- which you may not know that you have very often -- which is to understand how to sit next to a physicist at a dinner party and have a conversation. (Laughter) And the words that I would like you to focus on are complexity and emergence, because these will enable you to start the conversation and then daydream about other things.
(Laughter) All right, what is complexity in this view of things, and what is emergence?
We have, actually, a pretty good working definition of complexity.
It is a system, like traffic, which has components.
The components interact with one another.
These are cars and drivers. They dissipate energy.
It turns out that, whenever you have that system, weird stuff happens, and you in Los Angeles probably know this better than anyone.
Here's another example, which I put up because it's an example of really important current science.
You can't possibly read that. It's not intended that you read it, but that's a tiny part of the chemical reactions going on in each of your cells at any given moment.
And it's like the traffic that you see.
The amazing thing about the cell is that it actually does maintain a fairly stable working relationship with other cells, but we don't know why.
Anyone who tells you that we understand life, walk away.
And let me reduce this to the simplest level.
We've heard from Bill Gates recently.
All of us, to some extent, study this thing called a Bill Gates.
Terrific. You learn everything you can about that.
And then there's another kind of thing that you might study, and you study that hard.
That's a Bono, this is a Bono.
But then, if you know everything you can know about those two things, and you put them together, what can you say about this combination?
The answer is, not a lot.
And that's complexity.
Now, imagine building that up to a city, or to a society, and you've got, obviously, an interesting problem.
All right, so let me give you an example of simplicity of a particular kind.
And I want to introduce a word that I think is very useful, which is stacking.
And I'm going to use stacking for a kind of simplicity that has the characteristic that it is so simple and so reliable that I can build things with it.
Or I'm going to use simple to mean reliable, predictable, repeatable.
And I'm going to use as an example the Internet, because it's a particularly good example of stacked simplicity.
We call it a complex system, which it is, but it's also something else.
The Internet starts with mathematics, it starts with binary.
And if you look at the list of things on the bottom, we are familiar with the Arabic numbers one to 10 and so on.
In binary, one is 0001, seven is 0111.
The question is: Why is binary simpler than Arabic?
And the answer is, simply, that if I hold up three fingers, you can count that easily, but if I hold up this, it's sort of hard to say that I just did seven.
The virtue of binary is that it's the simplest possible way of representing numbers.
Anything else is more complicated.
You can catch errors with it, it's unambiguous in its reading, there are lots of good things about binary.
So it is very, very simple once you learn how to read it.
Now, if you like to represent this zero and one of binary, you need a device.
And think of things in your life that are binary, one of them is light switches.
They can be on and off. That's binary.
Now wall switches, we all know, fail.
But our friends who are condensed matter physicists managed to come up, some 50 years ago, with a very nice device, shown under that bell jar, which is a transistor.
A transistor is nothing more than a wall switch.
It turns things on and off, but it does so without moving parts and it doesn't fail, basically, for a very long period of time.
So the second layer of simplicity was the transistor in the Internet.
So, since the transistor is so simple, you can put lots of them together.
And you put lots of them together and you come with something called integrated circuits.
And a current integrated circuit might have in each one of these chips something like a billion transistors, all of which have to work perfectly every time.
So that's the next layer of simplicity, and, in fact, integrated circuits are really simple in the sense that they, in general, work really well.
With integrated circuits, you can build cellphones.
You all are accustomed to having your cellphones work the large majority of the time.
In Boston ... Boston is a little bit like Namibia in its cell phone coverage, (Laughter) so that we're not accustomed to that all the time, but some of the time.
But, in fact, if you have cell phones, you can now go to this nice lady who's somewhere like Namibia, and who is extremely happy with the fact that although she does not have an master's degree in electrical engineering from MIT, she's nonetheless able to hack her cell phone to get power in some funny way.
And from that comes the Internet.
And this is a map of bitflows across the continent.
The two blobs that are light in the middle there are the United States and Europe.
And then back to simplicity again.
So here we have what I think is one of the great ideas, which is Google.
Which, in this simple portal makes the claim that it makes accessible all of the world's information.
But the point is that that extraordinary simple idea rests on layers of simplicity each compounded into a complexity that is itself simple, in the sense that it is completely reliable.
All right, let me then finish off with four general statements, an example and two aphorisms.
The characteristics, which I think are useful to think about for simple things: First, they are predictable.
Their behavior is predictable.
Now, one of the nice characteristics of simple things is you know what it's going to do, in general.
So simplicity and predictability are characteristics of simple things.
The second is, and this is a real world statement, they're cheap.
If you have things that are cheap enough, people will find uses for them, even if they seem very primitive.
So, for example, stones.
You can build cathedrals out of stones, you just have to know what it does.
You carve them in blocks and then you pile them on top of one another, and they support weight.
So there has to be function, the function has to be predictable and the cost has to be low.
What that means is that you have to have a high performance or value for cost.
And then I would propose as this last component that they serve, or have the potential to serve, as building blocks.
That is, you can stack them.
And stack can mean this way, or it can mean this way, or it can mean in some arbitrary n-dimensional space.
But if you have something that has a function, and it's really cheap, people will find new ways of putting it together to make new things.
Cheap, functional, reliable things unleash the creativity of people who then build stuff that you could not imagine.
There's no way of predicting the Internet based on the first transistor.
It just is not possible.
So these are the components.
Now, the example is something that I want to give you from the work that we ourselves do.
We are very interested in delivering health care in the developing world, and one of the things that we wish to do in this particular business is to find a way of doing medical diagnosis at as close to zero cost as we can manage.
So, how does one do that?
This is a world in which there's no electricity, there's no money, there's no medical competence.
And I don't want to spend your time in going through the details, but in the lower right-hand corner, you see an example of the kind of thing that we have.
It's a little paper chip.
It has a few things printed on it using the same technology that you use for making comic books, which was the inspiration for this particular idea.
And you put a drop, in this case, of urine at the bottom.
It wicks its way up into these little branches.
You know, no power required.
It turns colors. In this particular case, you're reading kidney function.
And, since the health care worker of much of this part of the world is an 18 year-old with an AK-47, who happens to be out of work and is willing to go around and do this sort of thing, he can take a picture of it with his cellphone, send the picture back to where there is a doctor, and the doctor can look at it.
So what you've done is to take a technology, which is available everywhere, make a device, which is extremely cheap, and make it in such a fashion that it is very, very reliable.
If we can pull this off, if we can build more function, it will be stackable.
That is to say, if we can make the basic technology of one or two things work, it will be applicable to a very, very large variety of human conditions, and hence, extendable in both vertical and horizontal directions.
Part of my interest in this, I have to say, is that I would like to -- how do I put this politely? -- change the way, or maybe eviscerate, the capital structure of the U.S. health care system, which I think is fundamentally broken.
So, let me close -- (Applause) Let me close with my two aphorisms.
One of them is from Mr. Einstein, and he says, "Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler."
And I think that's a very good way of thinking about the problem.
If you take too much out of something that's simple, you lose function.
You have to have low cost, but you also have to have a function.
So you can't make it too simple.
And the second is a design issue, and it's not directly relevant, but it's a nice statement.
This is by de Saint-Exupery.
And he says, "You know you've achieved perfection in design, not when you have nothing more to add, but when you have nothing more to take away."
And that certainly is going in the right direction.
So, what I think one can begin to do with this kind of cut at the word simplicity, which doesn't cover Brancusi, it doesn't answer the question of why Mondrian is better or worse or simpler or less simpler than Van Gogh, and certainly doesn't address the question of whether Mozart is simpler than Bach.
But it does make a point -- which is one which, in a sense, differentiates the real world of people who make things, and the world of people who think about things, which is, there is an intellectual merit to asking: How do we make things as simple as we can, as cheap as we can, as functional as we can and as freely interconnectable as we can?
If we make that kind of simplicity in our technology and then give it to you guys, you can go off and do all kinds of fabulous things with it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Quick question.
So can you picture that a science of simplicity might get to the point where you could look out at various systems -- say a financial system or a legal system, health system -- and say, "That has got to the point of danger or dysfunctionality for the following reasons, and this is how we might simplify it"?
George Whitesides: Yes, I think you could. Because if you look at the components from which the system is made and examine their fragility, or their stability, you can probably build a kind of risk assessment based on that basis.
CA: Have you started to do that?
I mean, with the health system, you got a sort of radical solution on the cost side, but in terms of the system itself?
GW: Well, no.
How do I put that simply? No.
CA: That was a simple, powerful answer. GW: Yes.
CA: So, in terms of that diagnostic technology that you've got, where is that, and when do you see that maybe getting rolled out to scale.
GW: That's coming out soon. I mean, the systems work, and we have to find out how to manufacture them and do things of this kind, but the basic technology works.
CA: You've got a company set up to ...
GW: A foundation, a foundation. Not-for-profit.
CA: All right. Well, thank you so much for your talk. Thank you. (Applause)
If you go on the TED website, you can currently find there over a full week of TEDTalk videos, over 1.3 million words of transcripts and millions of user ratings.
And that's a huge amount of data.
And it got me wondering: If you took all this data and put it through statistical analysis, could you reverse engineer a TEDTalk?
Could you create the ultimate TEDTalk?
(Laughter) (Applause) And also, could you create the worst possible TEDTalk that they would still let you get away with?
To find this out, I looked at three things: I looked at the topic that you should choose, I looked at how you should deliver it and the visuals onstage.
Now, with the topic: There's a whole range of topics you can choose, but you should choose wisely, because your topic strongly correlates with how users will react to your talk.
Now, to make this more concrete, let's look at the list of top 10 words that statistically stick out in the most favorite TEDTalks and in the least favorite TEDTalks.
So if you came here to talk about how French coffee will spread happiness in our brains, that's a go.
(Laughter) (Applause) Whereas, if you wanted to talk about your project involving oxygen, girls, aircraft -- actually, I would like to hear that talk, (Laughter) but statistics say it's not so good.
Oh, well.
If you generalize this, the most favorite TEDTalks are those that feature topics we can connect with, both easily and deeply, such as happiness, our own body, food, emotions.
And the more technical topics, such as architecture, materials and, strangely enough, men, those are not good topics to talk about.
How should you deliver your talk?
TED is famous for keeping a very sharp eye on the clock, so they're going to hate me for revealing this, because, actually, you should talk as long as they will let you. (Laughter) Because the most favorite TEDTalks are, on average, over 50 percent longer than the least favorite ones.
And this holds true for all ranking lists on TED.com except if you want to have a talk that's beautiful, inspiring or funny.
Then, you should be brief. (Laughter) But other than that, talk until they drag you off the stage.
(Laughter) Now, while ...
(Applause) While you're pushing the clock, there's a few rules to obey.
I found these rules out by comparing the statistics of four-word phrases that appear more often in the most favorite TEDTalks as opposed to the least favorite TEDTalks.
I'll give you three examples.
First of all, I must, as a speaker, provide a service to the audience and talk about what I will give you, instead of saying what I can't have.
Secondly, it's imperative that you do not cite The New York Times.
(Laughter) And finally, it's okay for the speaker -- that's the good news -- to fake intellectual capacity.
If I don't understand something, I can just say, "etc., etc."
You'll all stay with me.
It's perfectly fine.
(Applause) Now, let's go to the visuals.
The most obvious visual thing on stage is the speaker.
And analysis shows if you want to be among the most favorite TED speakers, you should let your hair grow a little bit longer than average, make sure you wear your glasses and be slightly more dressed-up than the average TED speaker.
Slides are okay, though you might consider going for props.
And now the most important thing, that is the mood onstage.
Color plays a very important role.
Color closely correlates with the ratings that talks get on the website.
(Applause) For example, fascinating talks contain a statistically high amount of exactly this blue color, (Laughter) much more than the average TEDTalk.
Ingenious TEDTalks, much more this green color, etc., et.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, personally, I think I'm not the first one who has done this analysis, but I'll leave this to your good judgment.
So, now it's time to put it all together and design the ultimate TEDTalk.
Now, since this is TEDActive, and I learned from my analysis that I should actually give you something, I will not impose the ultimate or worst TEDTalk on you, but rather give you a tool to create your own.
And I call this tool the TEDPad.
(Laughter) And the TEDPad is a matrix of 100 specifically selected, highly curated sentences that you can easily piece together to get your own TEDTalk.
You only have to make one decision, and that is: Are you going to use the white version for very good TEDTalks, about creativity, human genius?
Or are you going to go with a black version, which will allow you to create really bad TEDTalks, mostly about blogs, politics and stuff?
So, download it and have fun with it.
Now I hope you enjoy the session.
I hope you enjoy designing your own ultimate and worst possible TEDTalks.
And I hope some of you will be inspired for next year to create this, which I really want to see.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thanks.
So here it is. You can check: I am short, I'm French, I have a pretty strong French accent, so that's going to be clear in a moment.
Maybe a sobering thought and something you all know about.
And I suspect many of you gave something to the people of Haiti this year.
And there is something else I believe in the back of your mind you also know.
That is, every day, 25,000 children die of entirely preventable causes.
That's a Haiti earthquake every eight days.
And I suspect many of you probably gave something towards that problem as well, but somehow it doesn't happen with the same intensity.
So why is that?
Well, here is a thought experiment for you.
Imagine you have a few million dollars that you've raised -- maybe you're a politician in a developing country and you have a budget to spend. You want to spend it on the poor: How do you go about it?
Do you believe the people who tell you that all we need to do is to spend money?
That we know how to eradicate poverty, we just need to do more?
Or do you believe the people who tell you that aid is not going to help, on the contrary it might hurt, it might exacerbate corruption, dependence, etc.?
After all, we have spent billions of dollars on aid.
Maybe you look at the past and see.
Has it done any good?
And, sadly, we don't know.
And worst of all, we will never know.
And the reason is that -- take Africa for example.
Africans have already got a lot of aid.
These are the blue bars.
And the GDP in Africa is not making much progress.
Okay, fine. How do you know what would have happened without the aid?
Maybe it would have been much worse, or maybe it would have been better.
We have no idea. We don't know what the counterfactual is.
There's only one Africa.
So what do you do?
To give the aid, and hope and pray that something comes out of it?
Or do you focus on your everyday life and let the earthquake every eight days continue to happen?
The thing is, if we don't know whether we are doing any good, we are not any better than the Medieval doctors and their leeches.
Sometimes the patient gets better, sometimes the patient dies.
Is it the leeches? Is it something else?
We don't know.
So here are some other questions.
They're smaller questions, but they are not that small.
Immunization, that's the cheapest way to save a child's life.
And the world has spent a lot of money on it: The GAVI and the Gates Foundations are each pledging a lot of money towards it, and developing countries themselves have been doing a lot of effort.
And yet, every year at least 25 million children do not get the immunization they should get.
So this is what you call a "last mile problem."
The technology is there, the infrastructure is there, and yet it doesn't happen.
So you have your million.
How do you use your million to solve this last mile problem?
And here's another question: Malaria. Malaria kills almost 900,000 people every year, most of them in Sub-Saharan Africa, most of them under five.
In fact, that is the leading cause of under-five mortality.
We already know how to kill malaria, but some people come to you and say, "You have your millions. How about bed nets?"
Bed nets are very cheap.
For 10 dollars, you can manufacture and ship an insecticide treated bed net and you can teach someone to use them.
And, not only do they protect the people who sleep under them, but they have these great contagion benefits.
If half of a community sleeps under a net, the other half also benefits because the contagion of the disease spread.
And yet, only a quarter of kids at risk sleep under a net.
Societies should be willing to go out and subsidize the net, give them for free, or, for that matter, pay people to use them because of those contagion benefits.
"Not so fast," say other people.
"If you give the nets for free, people are not going to value them.
They're not going to use them, or at least they're not going to use them as bed nets, maybe as fishing nets."
So, what do you do?
Do you give the nets for free to maximize coverage, or do you make people pay in order to make sure that they really value them?
How do you know?
And a third question: Education.
Maybe that's the solution, maybe we should send kids to school.
But how do you do that?
Do you hire teachers? Do you build more schools?
Do you provide school lunch?
How do you know?
So here is the thing.
I cannot answer the big question, whether aid did any good or not.
But these three questions, I can answer them.
It's not the Middle Ages anymore, it's the 21st century.
And in the 20th century, randomized, controlled trials have revolutionized medicine by allowing us to distinguish between drugs that work and drugs that don't work.
And you can do the same randomized, controlled trial for social policy.
You can put social innovation to the same rigorous, scientific tests that we use for drugs.
And in this way, you can take the guesswork out of policy-making by knowing what works, what doesn't work and why.
And I'll give you some examples with those three questions.
So I start with immunization.
Here's Udaipur District, Rajasthan. Beautiful.
Well, when I started working there, about one percent of children were fully immunized.
That's bad, but there are places like that.
Now, it's not because the vaccines are not there -- they are there and they are free -- and it's not because parents do not care about their kids.
The same child that is not immunized against measles, if they do get measles, parents will spend thousands of rupees to help them.
So you get these empty village subcenters and crowded hospitals.
So what is the problem?
Well, part of the problem, surely, is people do not fully understand.
After all, in this country as well, all sorts of myths and misconceptions go around immunization.
So if that's the case, that's difficult, because persuasion is really difficult.
But maybe there is another problem as well.
It's going from intention to action.
Imagine you are a mother in Udaipur District, Rajasthan.
You have to walk a few kilometers to get your kids immunized.
And maybe when you get there, what you find is this: The subcenter is closed. Ao you have to come back, and you are so busy and you have so many other things to do, you will always tend to postpone and postpone, and eventually it gets too late.
Well, if that's the problem, then that's much easier.
Because A, we can make it easy, and B, we can maybe give people a reason to act today, rather than wait till tomorrow.
So these are simple ideas, but we didn't know.
So let's try them.
So what we did is we did a randomized, controlled trial in 134 villages in Udaipur Districts.
So the blue dots are selected randomly.
We made it easy -- I'll tell you how in a moment.
In the red dots, we made it easy and gave people a reason to act now.
The white dots are comparisons, nothing changed.
So we make it easy by organizing this monthly camp where people can get their kids immunized.
And then you make it easy and give a reason to act now by adding a kilo of lentils for each immunization.
Now, a kilo of lentils is tiny.
It's never going to convince anybody to do something that they don't want to do.
On the other hand, if your problem is you tend to postpone, then it might give you a reason to act today rather than later.
So what do we find?
Well, beforehand, everything is the same.
That's the beauty of randomization.
Afterwards, the camp -- just having the camp -- increases immunization from six percent to 17 percent.
That's full immunization.
That's not bad, that's a good improvement.
Add the lentils and you reach to 38 percent.
So here you've got your answer.
Make it easy and give a kilo of lentils, you multiply immunization rate by six.
Now, you might say, "Well, but it's not sustainable.
We cannot keep giving lentils to people."
Well, it turns out it's wrong economics, because it is cheaper to give lentils than not to give them.
Since you have to pay for the nurse anyway, the cost per immunization ends up being cheaper if you give incentives than if you don't.
How about bed nets?
Should you give them for free, or should you ask people to pay for them?
So the answer hinges on the answer to three simple questions.
One is: If people must pay for a bed net, are they going to purchase them?
The second one is: If I give bed nets for free, are people going to use them?
And the third one is: Do free bed nets discourage future purchase?
The third one is important because if we think people get used to handouts, it might destroy markets to distribute free bed nets.
Now this is a debate that has generated a lot of emotion and angry rhetoric.
It's more ideological than practical, but it turns out it's an easy question.
We can know the answer to this question.
We can just run an experiment.
And many experiments have been run, and they all have the same results, so I'm just going to talk to you about one.
And this one that was in Kenya, they went around and distributed to people vouchers, discount vouchers.
So people with their voucher could get the bed net in the local pharmacy.
And some people get 100 percent discount, and some people get 20 percent discounts, and some people get 50 percent discount, etc.
And now we can see what happens.
So, how about the purchasing?
Well, what you can see is that when people have to pay for their bed nets, the coverage rate really falls down a lot.
So even with partial subsidy, three dollars is still not the full cost of a bed net, and now you only have 20 percent of the people with the bed nets, you lose the health immunity, that's not great.
Second thing is, how about the use?
Well, the good news is, people, if they have the bed nets, will use the bed nets regardless of how they got it.
If they get it for free, they use it.
If they have to pay for it, they use it.
How about the long term?
In the long term, people who got the free bed nets, one year later, were offered the option to purchase a bed net at two dollars.
And people who got the free one were actually more likely to purchase the second one than people who didn't get a free one.
So people do not get used to handouts; they get used to nets.
Maybe we need to give them a little bit more credit.
So, that's for bed nets. So you will think, "That's great.
You know how to immunize kids, you know how to give bed nets."
But what politicians need is a range of options.
They need to know: Out of all the things I could do, what is the best way to achieve my goals?
So suppose your goal is to get kids into school.
There are so many things you could do. You could pay for uniforms, you could eliminate fees, you could build latrines, you could give girls sanitary pads, etc., etc.
So what's the best?
Well, at some level, we think all of these things should work.
So, is that sufficient? If we think they should work intuitively, should we go for them?
Well, in business, that's certainly not the way we would go about it.
Consider for example transporting goods.
Before the canals were invented in Britain before the Industrial Revolution, goods used to go on horse carts.
And then canals were built, and with the same horseman and the same horse, you could carry ten times as much cargo.
So should they have continued to carry the goods on the horse carts, on the ground, that they would eventually get there?
Well, if that had been the case, there would have been no Industrial Revolution.
So why shouldn't we do the same with social policy?
In technology, we spend so much time experimenting, fine-tuning, getting the absolute cheapest way to do something, so why aren't we doing that with social policy?
Well, with experiments, what you can do is answer a simple question.
Suppose you have 100 dollars to spend on various interventions.
How many extra years of education do you get for your hundred dollars?
Now I'm going to show you what we get with various education interventions.
So the first ones are if you want the usual suspects, hire teachers, school meals, school uniforms, scholarships.
And that's not bad. For your hundred dollars, you get between one and three extra years of education.
Things that don't work so well is bribing parents, just because so many kids are already going to school that you end up spending a lot of money.
And here are the most surprising results.
Tell people the benefits of education, that's very cheap to do.
So for every hundred dollars you spend doing that, you get 40 extra years of education.
And, in places where there are worms, intestinal worms, cure the kids of their worms.
And for every hundred dollars, you get almost 30 extra years of education.
So this is not your intuition, this is not what people would have gone for, and yet, these are the programs that work.
We need that kind of information, we need more of it, and then we need to guide policy.
So now, I started from the big problem, and I couldn't answer it.
And I cut it into smaller questions, and I have the answer to these smaller questions.
And they are good, scientific, robust answers.
So let's go back to Haiti for a moment.
In Haiti, about 200,000 people died -- actually, a bit more by the latest estimate.
And the response of the world was great: Two billion dollars got pledged just last month, so that's about 10,000 dollars per death.
That doesn't sound like that much when you think about it.
But if we were willing to spend 10,000 dollars for every child under five who dies, that would be 90 billion per year just for that problem.
And yet it doesn't happen.
So, why is that?
Well, I think what part of the problem is that, in Haiti, although the problem is huge, somehow we understand it, it's localized.
You give your money to Doctors Without Borders, you give your money to Partners In Health, and they'll send in the doctors, and they'll send in the lumber, and they'll helicopter things out and in.
And the problem of poverty is not like that.
So, first, it's mostly invisible; second, it's huge; and third, we don't know whether we are doing the right thing.
There's no silver bullet.
You cannot helicopter people out of poverty.
And that's very frustrating.
But look what we just did today.
I gave you three simple answers to three questions: Give lentils to immunize people, provide free bed nets, deworm children.
With immunization or bed nets, you can save a life for 300 dollars per life saved.
With deworming, you can get an extra year of education for three dollars.
So we cannot eradicate poverty just yet, but we can get started.
And maybe we can get started small with things that we know are effective.
Here's an example of how this can be powerful.
Deworming.
Worms have a little bit of a problem grabbing the headlines.
They are not beautiful and don't kill anybody.
And yet, when the young global leader in Davos showed the numbers I gave you, they started Deworm the World.
And thanks to Deworm the World, and the effort of many country governments and foundations, 20 million school-aged children got dewormed in 2009.
So this evidence is powerful.
It can prompt action.
So we should get started now.
It's not going to be easy.
It's a very slow process.
You have to keep experimenting, and sometimes ideology has to be trumped by practicality.
And sometimes what works somewhere doesn't work elsewhere.
So it's a slow process, but there is no other way.
These economics I'm proposing, it's like 20th century medicine.
It's a slow, deliberative process of discovery.
There is no miracle cure, but modern medicine is saving millions of lives every year, and we can do the same thing.
And now, maybe, we can go back to the bigger question that I started with at the beginning.
I cannot tell you whether the aid we have spent in the past has made a difference, but can we come back here in 30 years and say, "What we have done, it really prompted a change for the better."
I believe we can and I hope we will.
Thank you.
(Applause)
How do you explain when things don't go as we assume?
Or better, how do you explain when others are able to achieve things that seem to defy all of the assumptions?
For example: Why is Apple so innovative?
Year after year, after year, they're more innovative than all their competition.
And yet, they're just a computer company.
They're just like everyone else.
They have the same access to the same talent, the same agencies, the same consultants, the same media.
Then why is it that they seem to have something different?
Why is it that Martin Luther King led the Civil Rights Movement?
He wasn't the only man who suffered in pre-civil rights America, and he certainly wasn't the only great orator of the day.
Why him?
And why is it that the Wright brothers were able to figure out controlled, powered man flight when there were certainly other teams who were better qualified, better funded -- and they didn't achieve powered man flight, and the Wright brothers beat them to it.
There's something else at play here.
About three and a half years ago, I made a discovery.
And this discovery profoundly changed my view on how I thought the world worked, and it even profoundly changed the way in which I operate in it.
As it turns out, there's a pattern.
As it turns out, all the great inspiring leaders and organizations in the world, whether it's Apple or Martin Luther King or the Wright brothers, they all think, act and communicate the exact same way.
And it's the complete opposite to everyone else.
All I did was codify it, and it's probably the world's simplest idea.
I call it the golden circle.
Why? How? What?
This little idea explains why some organizations and some leaders are able to inspire where others aren't.
Let me define the terms really quickly.
Every single person, every single organization on the planet knows what they do, 100 percent.
Some know how they do it, whether you call it your differentiated value proposition or your proprietary process or your USP.
But very, very few people or organizations know why they do what they do.
And by "why" I don't mean "to make a profit."
That's a result. It's always a result.
By "why," I mean: What's your purpose?
What's your cause? What's your belief?
Why does your organization exist?
Why do you get out of bed in the morning?
And why should anyone care?
As a result, the way we think, we act, the way we communicate is from the outside in, it's obvious.
We go from the clearest thing to the fuzziest thing.
But the inspired leaders and the inspired organizations -- regardless of their size, regardless of their industry -- all think, act and communicate from the inside out.
Let me give you an example.
I use Apple because they're easy to understand and everybody gets it.
If Apple were like everyone else, a marketing message from them might sound like this: "We make great computers.
They're beautifully designed, simple to use and user friendly.
Want to buy one?"
That's how most of us communicate.
That's how most marketing and sales are done, that's how we communicate interpersonally.
We say what we do, we say how we're different or better and we expect some sort of a behavior, a purchase, a vote, something like that.
Here's our new law firm: We have the best lawyers with the biggest clients, we always perform for our clients.
Here's our new car: It gets great gas mileage, it has leather seats.
Buy our car.
Here's how Apple actually communicates.
"Everything we do, we believe in challenging the status quo.
We believe in thinking differently.
The way we challenge the status quo is by making our products beautifully designed, simple to use and user friendly.
We just happen to make great computers.
Want to buy one?"
Totally different, right?
I just reversed the order of the information.
What it proves to us is that people don't buy what you do; people buy why you do it.
This explains why every single person in this room is perfectly comfortable buying a computer from Apple.
But we're also perfectly comfortable buying an MP3 player from Apple, or a phone from Apple, or a DVR from Apple.
As I said before, Apple's just a computer company.
Nothing distinguishes them structurally from any of their competitors.
Their competitors are equally qualified to make all of these products.
In fact, they tried.
A few years ago, Gateway came out with flat-screen TVs.
They're eminently qualified to make flat-screen TVs.
They've been making flat-screen monitors for years.
Nobody bought one.
Dell came out with MP3 players and PDAs, and they make great quality products, and they can make perfectly well-designed products -- and nobody bought one.
In fact, talking about it now, we can't even imagine buying an MP3 player from Dell.
Why would you buy one from a computer company?
But we do it every day.
People don't buy what you do; they buy why you do it.
The goal is not to do business with everybody who needs what you have.
The goal is to do business with people who believe what you believe.
Here's the best part: None of what I'm telling you is my opinion.
It's all grounded in the tenets of biology.
Not psychology, biology.
If you look at a cross-section of the human brain, from the top down, the human brain is actually broken into three major components that correlate perfectly with the golden circle.
Our newest brain, our Homo sapien brain, our neocortex, corresponds with the "what" level.
The neocortex is responsible for all of our rational and analytical thought and language.
The middle two sections make up our limbic brains, and our limbic brains are responsible for all of our feelings, like trust and loyalty.
It's also responsible for all human behavior, all decision-making, and it has no capacity for language.
In other words, when we communicate from the outside in, yes, people can understand vast amounts of complicated information like features and benefits and facts and figures.
It just doesn't drive behavior.
When we can communicate from the inside out, we're talking directly to the part of the brain that controls behavior, and then we allow people to rationalize it with the tangible things we say and do.
This is where gut decisions come from.
Sometimes you can give somebody all the facts and figures, and they say, "I know what all the facts and details say, but it just doesn't feel right."
Why would we use that verb, it doesn't "feel" right?
Because the part of the brain that controls decision-making doesn't control language.
The best we can muster up is, "I don't know. It just doesn't feel right."
Or sometimes you say you're leading with your heart or soul.
I hate to break it to you, those aren't other body parts controlling your behavior.
It's all happening here in your limbic brain, the part of the brain that controls decision-making and not language.
But if you don't know why you do what you do, and people respond to why you do what you do, then how will you ever get people to vote for you, or buy something from you, or, more importantly, be loyal and want to be a part of what it is that you do.
The goal is not just to sell to people who need what you have; the goal is to sell to people who believe what you believe.
The goal is not just to hire people who need a job; it's to hire people who believe what you believe.
I always say that, you know, if you hire people just because they can do a job, they'll work for your money, but if they believe what you believe, they'll work for you with blood and sweat and tears.
Nowhere else is there a better example than with the Wright brothers.
Most people don't know about Samuel Pierpont Langley.
And back in the early 20th century, the pursuit of powered man flight was like the dot com of the day.
Everybody was trying it.
And Samuel Pierpont Langley had, what we assume, to be the recipe for success.
Even now, you ask people, "Why did your product or why did your company fail?"
and people always give you the same permutation of the same three things: under-capitalized, the wrong people, bad market conditions.
It's always the same three things, so let's explore that.
Samuel Pierpont Langley was given 50,000 dollars by the War Department to figure out this flying machine.
Money was no problem.
He held a seat at Harvard and worked at the Smithsonian and was extremely well-connected; he knew all the big minds of the day.
He hired the best minds money could find and the market conditions were fantastic.
The New York Times followed him around everywhere, and everyone was rooting for Langley.
Then how come we've never heard of Samuel Pierpont Langley?
A few hundred miles away in Dayton, Ohio, Orville and Wilbur Wright, they had none of what we consider to be the recipe for success.
They had no money; they paid for their dream with the proceeds from their bicycle shop.
Not a single person on the Wright brothers' team had a college education, not even Orville or Wilbur.
And The New York Times followed them around nowhere.
The difference was, Orville and Wilbur were driven by a cause, by a purpose, by a belief.
They believed that if they could figure out this flying machine, it'll change the course of the world.
Samuel Pierpont Langley was different.
He wanted to be rich, and he wanted to be famous.
He was in pursuit of the result.
He was in pursuit of the riches.
And lo and behold, look what happened.
The people who believed in the Wright brothers' dream worked with them with blood and sweat and tears.
The others just worked for the paycheck.
They tell stories of how every time the Wright brothers went out, they would have to take five sets of parts, because that's how many times they would crash before supper.
And, eventually, on December 17th, 1903, the Wright brothers took flight, and no one was there to even experience it.
We found out about it a few days later.
And further proof that Langley was motivated by the wrong thing: the day the Wright brothers took flight, he quit.
He could have said, "That's an amazing discovery, guys, and I will improve upon your technology," but he didn't.
He wasn't first, he didn't get rich, he didn't get famous, so he quit.
People don't buy what you do; they buy why you do it.
If you talk about what you believe, you will attract those who believe what you believe.
But why is it important to attract those who believe what you believe?
Something called the law of diffusion of innovation, if you don't know the law, you know the terminology.
The first 2.5% of our population are our innovators.
The next 13.5% of our population are our early adopters.
The next 34% are your early majority, your late majority and your laggards.
The only reason these people buy touch-tone phones is because you can't buy rotary phones anymore.
(Laughter) We all sit at various places at various times on this scale, but what the law of diffusion of innovation tells us is that if you want mass-market success or mass-market acceptance of an idea, you cannot have it until you achieve this tipping point between 15 and 18 percent market penetration, and then the system tips.
I love asking businesses, "What's your conversion on new business?"
They love to tell you, "It's about 10 percent," proudly.
Well, you can trip over 10% of the customers.
We all have about 10% who just "get it."
That's how we describe them, right?
That's like that gut feeling, "Oh, they just get it."
The problem is: How do you find the ones that get it before doing business versus the ones who don't get it?
So it's this here, this little gap that you have to close, as Jeffrey Moore calls it, "Crossing the Chasm" -- because, you see, the early majority will not try something until someone else has tried it first.
And these guys, the innovators and the early adopters, they're comfortable making those gut decisions.
They're more comfortable making those intuitive decisions that are driven by what they believe about the world and not just what product is available.
These are the people who stood in line for six hours to buy an iPhone when they first came out, when you could have bought one off the shelf the next week.
These are the people who spent 40,000 dollars on flat-screen TVs when they first came out, even though the technology was substandard.
And, by the way, they didn't do it because the technology was so great; they did it for themselves.
It's because they wanted to be first.
People don't buy what you do; they buy why you do it and what you do simply proves what you believe.
In fact, people will do the things that prove what they believe.
The reason that person bought the iPhone in the first six hours, stood in line for six hours, was because of what they believed about the world, and how they wanted everybody to see them: they were first.
People don't buy what you do; they buy why you do it.
So let me give you a famous example, a famous failure and a famous success of the law of diffusion of innovation.
First, the famous failure.
It's a commercial example.
As we said before, the recipe for success is money and the right people and the right market conditions.
You should have success then.
Look at TiVo.
From the time TiVo came out about eight or nine years ago to this current day, they are the single highest-quality product on the market, hands down, there is no dispute.
They were extremely well-funded.
Market conditions were fantastic.
I mean, we use TiVo as verb.
I TiVo stuff on my piece-of-junk Time Warner DVR all the time.
(Laughter) But TiVo's a commercial failure.
They've never made money.
And when they went IPO, their stock was at about 30 or 40 dollars and then plummeted, and it's never traded above 10.
In fact, I don't think it's even traded above six, except for a couple of little spikes.
Because you see, when TiVo launched their product, they told us all what they had.
They said, "We have a product that pauses live TV, skips commercials, rewinds live TV and memorizes your viewing habits without you even asking."
And the cynical majority said, "We don't believe you.
We don't need it. We don't like it.
You're scaring us."
What if they had said, "If you're the kind of person who likes to have total control over every aspect of your life, boy, do we have a product for you.
It pauses live TV, skips commercials, memorizes your viewing habits, etc., etc."
People don't buy what you do; they buy why you do it, and what you do simply serves as the proof of what you believe.
Now let me give you a successful example of the law of diffusion of innovation.
In the summer of 1963, 250,000 people showed up on the mall in Washington to hear Dr. King speak.
They sent out no invitations, and there was no website to check the date.
How do you do that?
Well, Dr. King wasn't the only man in America who was a great orator.
He wasn't the only man in America who suffered in a pre-civil rights America.
In fact, some of his ideas were bad.
But he had a gift.
He didn't go around telling people what needed to change in America.
He went around and told people what he believed.
"I believe, I believe, I believe," he told people.
And people who believed what he believed took his cause, and they made it their own, and they told people.
And some of those people created structures to get the word out to even more people.
And lo and behold, 250,000 people showed up on the right day at the right time to hear him speak.
How many of them showed up for him?
Zero.
They showed up for themselves.
It's what they believed about America that got them to travel in a bus for eight hours to stand in the sun in Washington in the middle of August.
It's what they believed, and it wasn't about black versus white: 25% of the audience was white.
Dr. King believed that there are two types of laws in this world: those that are made by a higher authority and those that are made by men.
And not until all the laws that are made by men are consistent with the laws made by the higher authority will we live in a just world.
It just so happened that the Civil Rights Movement was the perfect thing to help him bring his cause to life.
We followed, not for him, but for ourselves.
By the way, he gave the "I have a dream" speech, not the "I have a plan" speech.
(Laughter) Listen to politicians now, with their comprehensive 12-point plans.
They're not inspiring anybody.
Because there are leaders and there are those who lead.
Leaders hold a position of power or authority, but those who lead inspire us.
Whether they're individuals or organizations, we follow those who lead, not because we have to, but because we want to.
We follow those who lead, not for them, but for ourselves.
And it's those who start with "why" that have the ability to inspire those around them or find others who inspire them.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I've been playing TED for nearly a decade, and I've very rarely played any new songs of my own.
And that was largely because there weren't any.
(Laughter) So I've been busy with a couple of projects, and one of them was this: The Nutmeg.
A 1930s ship's lifeboat, which I've been restoring in the garden of my beach house in England.
And, so now, when the polar ice caps melt, my recording studio will rise up like an ark, and I'll float off into the drowned world like a character from a J.G. Ballard novel.
During the day, the Nutmeg collects energy from solar panels on the roof of the wheelhouse, and from a 450 watt turbine up the mast.
So that when it gets dark, I've got plenty of power.
And I can light up the Nutmeg like a beacon.
And so I go in there until the early hours of the morning, and I work on new songs.
I'd like to play to you guys, if you're willing to be the first audience to hear it.
(Applause) It's about Billie Holiday.
And it appears that, some night in 1947 she left her physical space and was missing all night, until she reappeared in the morning.
But I know where she was.
She was with me on my lifeboat.
And she was hot.
(Music)  Billie crept softly   into my waking arms   warm like a sip of sour mash   Strange fruit for   a sweet hunk of trash   Panic at the stage door   of Carnegie Hall   "Famous Jazz Singer Gone AWOL"   Must have left the building   body and soul   On a creaky   piano stool tonight   as the moon is my   only witness   She was breathing   in my ear   "This time it's love"   But love is a loaded pistol   By daybreak she's gone   Over the frozen river, home   Me and Johnny Walker   See in the new age   alone   Stay with me   again tonight   Billie, time,   time is a wily trickster   Still an echo   in my heart says,   "This time it's love"  (Applause)
I thought in getting up to my TED wish I would try to begin by putting in perspective what I try to do and how it fits with what they try to do.
We live in a world that everyone knows is interdependent, but insufficient in three major ways.
It is, first of all, profoundly unequal: half the world's people still living on less than two dollars a day; a billion people with no access to clean water; two and a half billion no access to sanitation; a billion going to bed hungry every night; one in four deaths every year from AIDS, TB, malaria and the variety of infections associated with dirty water -- 80 percent of them under five years of age.
Even in wealthy countries it is common now to see inequality growing.
In the United States, since 2001 we've had five years of economic growth, five years of productivity growth in the workplace, but median wages are stagnant and the percentage of working families dropping below the poverty line is up by four percent.
The percentage of working families without health care up by four percent.
So this interdependent world which has been pretty good to most of us -- which is why we're all here in Northern California doing what we do for a living, enjoying this evening -- is profoundly unequal.
It is also unstable.
Unstable because of the threats of terror, weapons of mass destruction, the spread of global disease and a sense that we are vulnerable to it in a way that we weren't not so many years ago.
And perhaps most important of all, it is unsustainable because of climate change, resource depletion and species destruction.
When I think about the world I would like to leave to my daughter and the grandchildren I hope to have, it is a world that moves away from unequal, unstable, unsustainable interdependence to integrated communities -- locally, nationally and globally -- that share the characteristics of all successful communities: a broadly shared, accessible set of opportunities, a shared sense of responsibility for the success of the common enterprise and a genuine sense of belonging.
All easier said than done.
When the terrorist incidents occurred in the United Kingdom a couple of years ago, I think even though they didn't claim as many lives as we lost in the United States on 9/11, I think the thing that troubled the British most was that the perpetrators were not invaders, but homegrown citizens whose religious and political identities were more important to them than the people they grew up with, went to school with, worked with, shared weekends with, shared meals with.
In other words, they thought their differences were more important than their common humanity.
It is the central psychological plague of humankind in the 21st century.
Into this mix, people like us, who are not in public office, have more power to do good than at any time in history, because more than half the world's people live under governments they voted in and can vote out.
And even non-democratic governments are more sensitive to public opinion.
Because primarily of the power of the Internet, people of modest means can band together and amass vast sums of money that can change the world for some public good if they all agree.
When the tsunami hit South Asia, the United States contributed 1.2 billion dollars.
30 percent of our households gave.
Half of them gave over the Internet.
The median contribution was somewhere around 57 dollars.
And thirdly, because of the rise of non-governmental organizations.
They, businesses, other citizens' groups, have enormous power to affect the lives of our fellow human beings.
When I became president in 1993, there were none of these organizations in Russia.
There are now a couple of hundred thousand.
None in India. There are now at least a half a million active.
None in China. There are now 250,000 registered with the government, probably twice again that many who are not registered for political reasons.
When I organized my foundation, and I thought about the world as it is and the world that I hope to leave to the next generation, and I tried to be realistic about what I had cared about all my life that I could still have an impact on.
I wanted to focus on activities that would help to alleviate poverty, fight disease, combat climate change, bridge the religious, racial and other divides that torment the world, but to do it in a way that would either use whatever particular skills we could put together in our group to change the way some public good function was performed so that it would sweep across the world more.
You saw one reference to that in what we were able to do with AIDS drugs.
And I want to say that the head of our AIDS effort, and the person who also is primarily active in the wish I'll make tonight, Ira Magaziner, is here with me and I want to thank him for everything he's done.
He's over there.
(Applause) When I got out of office and was asked to work, first in the Caribbean, to try to help deal with the AIDS crisis, generic drugs were available for about 500 dollars a person a year.
If you bought them in vast bulks, you could get them at a little under 400 dollars.
The first country we went to work in, the Bahamas, was paying 3,500 dollars for these drugs.
The market was so terribly disorganized that they were buying this medicine through two agents who were gigging them sevenfold.
So the very first week we were working, we got the price down to 500 dollars.
And all of a sudden, they could save seven times as many lives for the same amount of money.
Then we went to work with the manufacturers of AIDS medicines, one of whom was cited in the film, and negotiated a whole different change in business strategy, because even at 500 dollars, these drugs were being sold on a high-margin, low-volume, uncertain-payment basis.
So we worked on improving the productivity of the operations and the supply chain, and went to a low-margin, high-volume, absolutely certain-payment business.
I joked that the main contribution we made to the battle against AIDS was to get the manufacturers to change from a jewelry store to a grocery store strategy.
But the price went to 140 dollars from 500.
And pretty soon, the average price was 192 dollars.
Now we can get it for about 100 dollars.
Children's medicine was 600 dollars, because nobody could afford to buy any of it.
We negotiated it down to 190.
Then, the French imposed their brilliantly conceived airline tax to create a something called UNITAID, got a bunch of other countries to help.
That children's medicine is now 60 dollars a person a year.
The only thing that is keeping us from basically saving the lives of everybody who needs the medicine to stay alive are the absence of systems necessary to diagnose, treat and care for people and deliver this medicine.
We started a childhood obesity initiative with the Heart Association in America.
We tried to do the same thing by negotiating industry-right deals with the soft drink and the snack food industry to cut the caloric and other dangerous content of food going to our children in the schools.
We just reorganized the markets.
And it occurred to me that in this whole non-governmental world, somebody needs to be thinking about organizing public goods markets.
And that is now what we're trying to do, and working with this large cities group to fight climate change, to negotiate huge, big, volume deals that will enable cities which generate 75 percent of the world's greenhouse gases, to drastically and quickly reduce greenhouse gas emissions in a way that is good economics.
And this whole discussion as if it's some sort of economic burden, is a mystery to me.
I think it's a bird's nest on the ground.
When Al Gore won his well-deserved Oscar for the "Inconvenient Truth" movie, I was thrilled, but I had urged him to make a second movie quickly.
For those of you who saw "An Inconvenient Truth," the most important slide in the Gore lecture is the last one, which shows here's where greenhouse gases are going if we don't do anything, here's where they could go.
And then there are six different categories of things we can do to change the trajectory.
We need a movie on those six categories.
And all of you need to have it embedded in your brains and to organize yourselves around it.
So we're trying to do that.
So organizing these markets is one thing we try to do.
Now we have taken on a second thing, and this gets to my wish.
It has been my experience in working in developing countries that while the headlines may all be -- the pessimistic headlines may say, well, we can't do this, that or the other thing because of corruption -- I think incapacity is a far bigger problem in poor countries than corruption, and feeds corruption.
We now have the money, given these low prices, to distribute AIDS drugs all over the world to people we cannot presently reach.
Today these low prices are available in the 25 countries where we work, and in a total of 62 countries, and about 550,000 people are getting the benefits of them.
But the money is there to reach others.
The systems are not there to reach the people.
So what we have been trying to do, working first in Rwanda and then in Malawi and other places -- but I want to talk about Rwanda tonight -- is to develop a model for rural health care in a very poor area that can be used to deal with AIDS, TB, malaria, other infectious diseases, maternal and child health, and a whole range of health issues poor people are grappling with in the developing world, that can first be scaled for the whole nation of Rwanda, and then will be a model that could literally be implemented in any other poor country in the world.
And the test is: one, will it do the job?
Will it provide high quality care?
And two, will it do it at a price that will enable the country to sustain a health care system without foreign donors after five to 10 years?
Because the longer I deal with these problems, the more convinced I am that we have to -- whether it's economics, health, education, whatever -- we have to build systems.
And the absence of systems that function break the connection which got you all in this seat tonight.
You think about whatever your life has been, however many obstacles you have faced in your life, at critical junctures you always knew there was a predictable connection between the effort you exerted and the result you achieved.
In a world with no systems, with chaos, everything becomes a guerilla struggle, and this predictability is not there.
And it becomes almost impossible to save lives, educate kids, develop economies, whatever.
The person, in my view, who has done the best job of this in the health care area, of building a system in a very poor area, is Dr. Paul Farmer, who, many of you know, has worked for now 20 years with his group, Partners in Health, primarily in Haiti where he started, but they've also worked in Russia, in Peru and other places around the world.
As poor as Haiti is, in the area where Farmer's clinic is active -- and they serve a catchment area far greater than the medical professionals they have would indicate they could serve -- since 1988, they have not lost one person to tuberculosis, not one.
And they've achieved a lot of other amazing health results.
So when we decided to work in Rwanda on trying to dramatically increase the income of the country and fight the AIDS problem, we wanted to build a healthcare network, because it had been totally destroyed during the genocide in 1994, and the per capita income was still under a dollar a day.
So I rang up, asked Paul Farmer if he would help.
Because it seemed to me if we could prove there was a model in Haiti and a model in Rwanda that we could then take all over the country, number one, it would be a wonderful thing for a country that has suffered as much as any on Earth in the last 15 years, and number two, we would have something that could then be adapted to any other poor country anywhere in the world.
And so we have set about doing that.
Now, we started working together 18 months ago.
And we're working in an area called Southern Kayonza, which is one of the poorest areas in Rwanda, with a group that originally includes about 400,000 people.
We're essentially implementing what Paul Farmer did in Haiti: he develops and trains paid community health workers who are able to identify health problems, ensure that people who have AIDS or TB are properly diagnosed and take their medicine regularly, who work on bringing about health education, clean water and sanitation, providing nutritional supplements and moving people up the chain of health care if they have problems of the severity that require it.
The procedures that make this work have been perfected, as I said, by Paul Farmer and his team in their work in rural Haiti over the last 20 years.
Recently we did an evaluation of the first 18 months of our efforts in Rwanda.
And the results were so good that the Rwandan government has now agreed to adopt the model for the entire country, and has strongly supported and put the full resources of the government behind it.
I'll tell you a little bit about our team because it's indicative of what we do.
We have about 500 people around the world working in our AIDS program, some of them for nothing -- just for transportation, room and board.
And then we have others working in these other related programs.
Our business plan in Rwanda was put together under the leadership of Diana Noble, who is an unusually gifted woman, but not unusual in the type of people who have been willing to do this kind of work.
She was the youngest partner at Schroder Ventures in London in her 20s.
She was CEO of a successful e-venture -- she started and built Reed Elsevier Ventures -- and at 45 she decided she wanted to do something different with her life.
So she now works full-time on this for very little pay.
She and her team of former business people have created a business plan that will enable us to scale this health system up for the whole country.
And it would be worthy of the kind of private equity work she used to do when she was making a lot more money for it.
When we came to this rural area, 45 percent of the children under the age of five had stunted growth due to malnutrition.
23 percent of them died before they reached the age of five.
Mortality at birth was over two-and-a-half percent.
Over 15 percent of the deaths among adults and children occurred because of intestinal parasites and diarrhea from dirty water and inadequate sanitation -- all entirely preventable and treatable.
Over 13 percent of the deaths were from respiratory illnesses -- again, all preventable and treatable.
And not a single soul in this area was being treated for AIDS or tuberculosis.
Within the first 18 months, the following things happened: we went from zero to about 2,000 people being treated for AIDS.
That's 80 percent of the people who need treatment in this area.
Listen to this: less than four-tenths of one percent of those being treated stopped taking their medicine or otherwise defaulted on treatment.
That's lower than the figure in the United States.
Less than three-tenths of one percent had to transfer to the more expensive second-line drugs.
400,000 pregnant women were brought into counseling and will give birth for the first time within an organized healthcare system.
That's about 43 percent of all the pregnancies.
About 40 percent of all the people -- I said 400,000. I meant 40,000.
About 40 percent of all the people who need TB treatment are now getting it -- in just 18 months, up from zero when we started.
43 percent of the children in need of an infant feeding program to prevent malnutrition and early death are now getting the food supplements they need to stay alive and to grow.
We've started the first malaria treatment programs they've ever had there.
Patients admitted to a hospital that was destroyed during the genocide that we have renovated along with four other clinics, complete with solar power generators, good lab technology.
We now are treating 325 people a month, despite the fact that almost 100 percent of the AIDS patients are now treated at home.
And the most important thing is because we've implemented Paul Farmer's model, using community health workers, we estimate that this system could be put into place for all of Rwanda for between five and six percent of GDP, and that the government could sustain that without depending on foreign aid after five or six years.
And for those of you who understand healthcare economics you know that all wealthy countries spend between nine and 11 percent of GDP on health care, except for the United States, we spend 16 -- but that's a story for another day.
(Laughter) We're now working with Partners in Health and the Ministry of Health in Rwanda and our Foundation folks to scale this system up.
We're also beginning to do this in Malawi and Lesotho.
And we have similar projects in Tanzania, Mozambique, Kenya and Ethiopia with other partners trying to achieve the same thing: to save as many lives as quickly as we can, but to do it in a systematic way that can be implemented nationwide and then with a model that can be implemented in any country in the world.
We need initial upfront investment to train doctors, nurses, health administration and community health workers throughout the country, to set up the information technology, the solar energy, the water and sanitation, the transportation infrastructure.
But over a five- to 10-year period, we will take down the need for outside assistance and eventually it will be phased out.
My wish is that TED assist us in our work and help us to build a high-quality rural health system in a poor country, Rwanda, that can be a model for Africa, and indeed, for any poor country anywhere in the world.
My belief is that this will help us to build a more integrated world with more partners and fewer terrorists, with more productive citizens and fewer haters, a place we'd all want our kids and our grandchildren to grow up in.
It has been an honor for me, particularly, to work in Rwanda where we also have a major economic development project in partnership with Sir Tom Hunter, the Scottish philanthropist, where last year we, using the same thing with AIDS drugs, cut the cost of fertilizer and the interest rates on microcredit loans by 30 percent and achieved three- to four-hundred percent increases in crop yields with the farmers.
These people have been through a lot and none of us, most of all me, helped them when they were on the verge of destroying each other.
We're undoing that now, and they are so over it and so into their future.
We're doing this in an environmentally responsible way.
I'm doing my best to convince them not to run the electric grid to the 35 percent of the people that have no access, but to do it with clean energy. To have responsible reforestation projects, the Rwandans, interestingly enough, have been quite good, Mr. Wilson, in preserving their topsoil.
There's a couple of guys from southern farming families -- the first thing I did when I went out to this place was to get down on my hands and knees and dig in the dirt and see what they'd done with it.
We have a chance here to prove that a country that almost slaughtered itself out of existence can practice reconciliation, reorganize itself, focus on tomorrow and provide comprehensive, quality health care with minimal outside help.
I am grateful for this prize, and I will use it to that end.
We could use some more help to do this, but think of what it would mean if we could have a world-class health system in Rwanda -- in a country with a less-than-one-dollar-a-day-per-capita income, one that could save hundreds of millions of lives over the next decade if applied to every similarly situated country on Earth.
It's worth a try and I believe it would succeed.
Thank you and God bless you.
(Applause)
I'm an ecologist, mostly a coral reef ecologist.
I started out in Chesapeake Bay and went diving in the winter and became a tropical ecologist overnight.
And it was really a lot of fun for about 10 years.
I mean, somebody pays you to go around and travel and look at some of the most beautiful places on the planet.
And that was what I did.
And I ended up in Jamaica, in the West Indies, where the coral reefs were really among the most extraordinary, structurally, that I ever saw in my life.
And this picture here, it's really interesting, it shows two things: First of all, it's in black and white because the water was so clear and you could see so far, and film was so slow in the 1960s and early 70s, you took pictures in black and white.
The other thing it shows you is that, although there's this beautiful forest of coral, there are no fish in that picture.
Those reefs at Discovery Bay, Jamaica were the most studied coral reefs in the world for 20 years.
We were the best and the brightest.
People came to study our reefs from Australia, which is sort of funny because now we go to theirs.
And the view of scientists about how coral reefs work, how they ought to be, was based on these reefs without any fish.
Then, in 1980, there was a hurricane, Hurricane Allen.
I put half the lab up in my house.
The wind blew very strong.
The waves were 25 to 50 feet high.
And the reefs disappeared, and new islands formed, and we thought, "Well, we're real smart.
We know that hurricanes have always happened in the past."
And we published a paper in Science, the first time that anybody ever described the destruction on a coral reef by a major hurricane.
And we predicted what would happen, and we got it all wrong.
And the reason was because of overfishing, and the fact that a last common grazer, a sea urchin, died.
And within a few months after that sea urchin dying, the seaweed started to grow.
And that is the same reef; that's the same reef 15 years ago; that's the same reef today.
The coral reefs of the north coast of Jamaica have a few percent live coral cover and a lot of seaweed and slime.
And that's more or less the story of the coral reefs of the Caribbean, and increasingly, tragically, the coral reefs worldwide.
Now, that's my little, depressing story.
All of us in our 60s and 70s have comparable depressing stories.
There are tens of thousands of those stories out there, and it's really hard to conjure up much of a sense of well-being, because it just keeps getting worse.
And the reason it keeps getting worse is that after a natural catastrophe, like a hurricane, it used to be that there was some kind of successional sequence of recovery, but what's going on now is that overfishing and pollution and climate change are all interacting in a way that prevents that.
And so I'm going to sort of go through and talk about those three kinds of things.
We hear a lot about the collapse of cod.
It's difficult to imagine that two, or some historians would say three world wars were fought during the colonial era for the control of cod.
Cod fed most of the people of Western Europe.
It fed the slaves brought to the Antilles, the song "Jamaica Farewell" -- "Ackee rice salt fish are nice" -- is an emblem of the importance of salt cod from northeastern Canada.
It all collapsed in the 80s and the 90s: 35,000 people lost their jobs.
And that was the beginning of a kind of serial depletion from bigger and tastier species to smaller and not-so-tasty species, from species that were near to home to species that were all around the world, and what have you.
It's a little hard to understand that, because you can go to a Costco in the United States and buy cheap fish.
You ought to read the label to find out where it came from, but it's still cheap, and everybody thinks it's okay.
It's hard to communicate this, and one way that I think is really interesting is to talk about sport fish, because people like to go out and catch fish.
It's one of those things.
This picture here shows the trophy fish, the biggest fish caught by people who pay a lot of money to get on a boat, go to a place off of Key West in Florida, drink a lot of beer, throw a lot of hooks and lines into the water, come back with the biggest and the best fish, and the champion trophy fish are put on this board, where people take a picture, and this guy is obviously really excited about that fish.
Well, that's what it's like now, but this is what it was like in the 1950s from the same boat in the same place on the same board on the same dock.
The trophy fish were so big that you couldn't put any of those small fish up on it.
And the average size trophy fish weighed 250 to 300 pounds, goliath grouper, and if you wanted to go out and kill something, you could pretty much count on being able to catch one of those fish.
And they tasted really good.
And people paid less in 1950 dollars to catch that than what people pay now to catch those little, tiny fish.
And that's everywhere.
It's not just the fish, though, that are disappearing.
Industrial fishing uses big stuff, big machinery.
We use nets that are 20 miles long.
We use longlines that have one million or two million hooks.
And we trawl, which means to take something the size of a tractor trailer truck that weighs thousands and thousands of pounds, put it on a big chain, and drag it across the sea floor to stir up the bottom and catch the fish.
Think of it as being kind of the bulldozing of a city or of a forest, because it clears it away.
And the habitat destruction is unbelievable.
This is a photograph, a typical photograph, of what the continental shelves of the world look like.
You can see the rows in the bottom, the way you can see the rows in a field that has just been plowed to plant corn.
What that was, was a forest of sponges and coral, which is a critical habitat for the development of fish.
What it is now is mud, and the area of the ocean floor that has been transformed from forest to level mud, to parking lot, is equivalent to the entire area of all the forests that have ever been cut down on all of the earth in the history of humanity.
We've managed to do that in the last 100 to 150 years.
We tend to think of oil spills and mercury and we hear a lot about plastic these days.
And all of that stuff is really disgusting, but what's really insidious is the biological pollution that happens because of the magnitude of the shifts that it causes to entire ecosystems.
And I'm going to just talk very briefly about two kinds of biological pollution: one is introduced species and the other is what comes from nutrients.
So this is the infamous Caulerpa taxifolia, the so-called killer algae.
A book was written about it.
It's a bit of an embarrassment.
It was accidentally released from the aquarium in Monaco, it was bred to be cold tolerant to have in peoples aquaria.
It's very pretty, and it has rapidly started to overgrow the once very rich biodiversity of the northwestern Mediterranean.
I don't know how many of you remember the movie "The Little Shop of Horrors," but this is the plant of "The Little Shop of Horrors."
But, instead of devouring the people in the shop, what it's doing is overgrowing and smothering virtually all of the bottom-dwelling life of the entire northwestern Mediterranean Sea.
We don't know anything that eats it, we're trying to do all sorts of genetics and figure out something that could be done, but, as it stands, it's the monster from hell, about which nobody knows what to do.
Now another form of pollution that's biological pollution is what happens from excess nutrients.
The green revolution, all of this artificial nitrogen fertilizer, we use too much of it.
It's subsidized, which is one of the reasons we used too much of it.
It runs down the rivers, and it feeds the plankton, the little microscopic plant cells in the coastal water.
But since we ate all the oysters and we ate all the fish that would eat the plankton, there's nothing to eat the plankton and there's more and more of it, so it dies of old age, which is unheard of for plankton.
And when it dies, it falls to the bottom and then it rots, which means that bacteria break it down.
And in the process they use up all the oxygen, and in using up all the oxygen they make the environment utterly lethal for anything that can't swim away.
So, what we end up with is a microbial zoo dominated by bacteria and jellyfish, as you see on the left in front of you.
And the only fishery left -- and it is a commercial fishery -- is the jellyfish fishery you see on the right, where there used to be prawns.
Even in Newfoundland where we used to catch cod, we now have a jellyfish fishery.
And another version of this sort of thing is what is often called red tides or toxic blooms.
That picture on the left is just staggering to me.
I have talked about it a million times, but it's unbelievable.
In the upper right of that picture on the left is almost the Mississippi Delta, and the lower left of that picture is the Texas-Mexico border.
You're looking at the entire northwestern Gulf of Mexico; you're looking at one toxic dinoflagellate bloom that can kill fish, made by that beautiful little creature on the lower right.
And in the upper right you see this black sort of cloud moving ashore.
That's the same species.
And as it comes to shore and the wind blows, and little droplets of the water get into the air, the emergency rooms of all the hospitals fill up with people with acute respiratory distress.
And that's retirement homes on the west coast of Florida.
A friend and I did this thing in Hollywood we called Hollywood ocean night, and I was trying to figure out how to explain to actors what's going on.
And I said, "So, imagine you're in a movie called 'Escape from Malibu' because all the beautiful people have moved to North Dakota, where it's clean and safe.
And the only people who are left there are the people who can't afford to move away from the coast, because the coast, instead of being paradise, is harmful to your health."
And then this is amazing.
It was when I was on holiday last early autumn in France.
This is from the coast of Brittany, which is being enveloped in this green, algal slime.
The reason that it attracted so much attention, besides the fact that it's disgusting, is that sea birds flying over it are asphyxiated by the smell and die, and a farmer died of it, and you can imagine the scandal that happened.
And so there's this war between the farmers and the fishermen about it all, and the net result is that the beaches of Brittany have to be bulldozed of this stuff on a regular basis.
And then, of course, there's climate change, and we all know about climate change.
I guess the iconic figure of it is the melting of the ice in the Arctic Sea.
Think about the thousands and thousands of people who died trying to find the Northwest Passage.
Well, the Northwest Passage is already there.
I think it's sort of funny; it's on the Siberian coast, maybe the Russians will charge tolls.
The governments of the world are taking this really seriously.
The military of the Arctic nations is taking it really seriously.
For all the denial of climate change by government leaders, the CIA and the navies of Norway and the U.S. and Canada, whatever are busily thinking about how they will secure their territory in this inevitability from their point of view.
And, of course, Arctic communities are toast.
The other kinds of effects of climate change -- this is coral bleaching. It's a beautiful picture, right?
All that white coral.
Except it's supposed to be brown.
What happens is that the corals are a symbiosis, and they have these little algal cells that live inside them.
And the algae give the corals sugar, and the corals give the algae nutrients and protection.
But when it gets too hot, the algae can't make the sugar.
The corals say, "You cheated. You didn't pay your rent."
They kick them out, and then they die.
Not all of them die; some of them survive, some more are surviving, but it's really bad news.
To try and give you a sense of this, imagine you go camping in July somewhere in Europe or in North America, and you wake up the next morning, and you look around you, and you see that 80 percent of the trees, as far as you can see, have dropped their leaves and are standing there naked.
And you come home, and you discover that 80 percent of all the trees in North America and in Europe have dropped their leaves.
And then you read in the paper a few weeks later, "Oh, by the way, a quarter of those died."
Well, that's what happened in the Indian Ocean during the 1998 El Nino, an area vastly greater than the size of North America and Europe, when 80 percent of all the corals bleached and a quarter of them died.
And then the really scary thing about all of this -- the overfishing, the pollution and the climate change -- is that each thing doesn't happen in a vacuum.
But there are these, what we call, positive feedbacks, the synergies among them that make the whole vastly greater than the sum of the parts.
And the great scientific challenge for people like me in thinking about all this, is do we know how to put Humpty Dumpty back together again?
I mean, because we, at this point, we can protect it.
But what does that mean?
We really don't know.
So what are the oceans going to be like in 20 or 50 years?
Well, there won't be any fish except for minnows, and the water will be pretty dirty, and all those kinds of things and full of mercury, etc., etc.
And dead zones will get bigger and bigger and they'll start to merge, and we can imagine something like the dead-zonification of the global, coastal ocean.
Then you sure won't want to eat fish that were raised in it, because it would be a kind of gastronomic Russian roulette.
Sometimes you have a toxic bloom; sometimes you don't.
That doesn't sell.
The really scary things though are the physical, chemical, oceanographic things that are happening.
As the surface of the ocean gets warmer, the water is lighter when it's warmer, it becomes harder and harder to turn the ocean over.
We say it becomes more strongly stratified.
The consequence of that is that all those nutrients that fuel the great anchoveta fisheries, of the sardines of California or in Peru or whatever, those slow down and those fisheries collapse.
And, at the same time, water from the surface, which is rich in oxygen, doesn't make it down and the ocean turns into a desert.
So the question is: How are we all going to respond to this?
And we can do all sorts of things to fix it, but in the final analysis, the thing we really need to fix is ourselves.
It's not about the fish; it's not about the pollution; it's not about the climate change.
It's about us and our greed and our need for growth and our inability to imagine a world that is different from the selfish world we live in today.
So the question is: Will we respond to this or not?
I would say that the future of life and the dignity of human beings depends on our doing that.
Thank you. (Applause)
I bring to you a message from tens of thousands of people -- in the villages, in the slums, in the hinterland of the country -- who have solved problems through their own genius, without any outside help.
When our home minister announces a few weeks ago a war on one third of India, about 200 districts that he mentioned were ungovernable, he missed the point.
The point that we have been stressing for the last 21 years, the point that people may be economically poor, but they're not poor in the mind.
In other words, the minds on the margin are not the marginal minds.
That is the message, which we started 31 years ago.
And what did it start?
Let me just tell you, briefly, my personal journey, which led me to come to this point.
In '85, '86, I was in Bangladesh advising the government and the research council there how to help scientists work on the lands, on the fields of the poor people, and how to develop research technologies, which are based on the knowledge of the people.
I came back in '86.
I had been tremendously invigorated by the knowledge and creativity that I found in that country, which had 60 percent landlessness but amazing creativity.
I started looking at my own work: The work that I had done for the previous 10 years, almost every time, had instances of knowledge that people had shared.
Now, I was paid in dollars as a consultant, and I looked at my income tax return and tried to ask myself: "Is there a line in my return, which shows how much of this income has gone to the people whose knowledge has made it possible?
Was it because I'm brilliant that I'm getting this reward, or because of the revolution?
Is it that I write very well?
Is it that I articulate very well?
Is it that I analyze the data very well?
Is it because I'm a professor, and, therefore, I must be entitled to this reward from society?"
I tried to convince myself that, "No, no, I have worked for the policy changes.
You know, the public policy will become more responsive to the needs of the poor, and, therefore I think it's okay."
But it appeared to me that all these years that I'd been working on exploitation -- exploitation by landlords, by moneylenders, by traders -- gave me an insight that probably I was also an exploiter, because there was no line in my income tax return which showed this income accrued because of the brilliance of the people -- those people who have shared their knowledge and good faith and trust with me -- and nothing ever went back to them.
So much so, that much of my work till that time was in the English language.
The majority of the people from whom I learned didn't know English.
So what kind of a contributor was I?
I was talking about social justice, and here I was, a professional who was pursuing the most unjust act -- of taking knowledge from the people, making them anonymous, getting rent from that knowledge by sharing it and doing consultancy, writing papers and publishing them in the papers, getting invited to the conferences, getting consultancies and whatever have you.
So then, a dilemma rose in the mind that, if I'm also an exploiter, then this is not right; life cannot go on like that.
And this was a moment of great pain and trauma because I couldn't live with it any longer.
So I did a review of ethical dilemma and value conflicts and management research, wrote, read about 100 papers.
And I came to the conclusion that while dilemma is unique, dilemma is not unique; the solution had to be unique.
And one day -- I don't know what happened -- while coming back from the office towards home, maybe I saw a honey bee or it occurred to my mind that if I only could be like the honey bee, life would be wonderful.
What the honey bee does: it pollinates, takes nectar from the flower, pollinates another flower, cross-pollinates.
And when it takes the nectar, the flowers don't feel shortchanged.
In fact, they invite the honey bees through their colors, and the bees don't keep all the honey for themselves.
These are the three guiding principles of the Honey Bee Network: that whenever we learn something from people it must be shared with them in their language.
They must not remain anonymous.
And I must tell you that after 20 years, I have not made one percent of change in the professional practice of this art.
That is a great tragedy -- which I'm carrying still with me and I hope that all of you will carry this with you -- that the profession still legitimizes publication of knowledge of people without attributing them by making them anonymous.
The research guidelines of U.S. National Academy of Sciences or Research Councils of the U.K.
or of Indian Councils of Science Research do not require that whatever you learn from people, you must share back with them.
We are talking about an accountable society, a society that is fair and just, and we don't even do justice in the knowledge market.
And India wants to be a knowledge society.
How will it be a knowledge society?
So, obviously, you cannot have two principles of justice, one for yourself and one for others.
It must be the same.
You cannot discriminate.
You cannot be in favor of your own values, which are at a distance from the values that you espouse.
So, fairness to one and to the other is not divisible.
Look at this picture.
Can you tell me where has it been taken from, and what is it meant for? Anybody?
I'm a professor; I must quiz you. (Laughter) Anybody? Any guess at all?
Pardon? (Audience Member: Rajasthan.) Anil Gupta: But what has it been used for? What has it been used for?
(Murmuring) Pardon?
You know, you're so right. We must give him a hand, because this man knows how insensitive our government is.
Look at this. This is the site of the government of India.
It invites tourists to see the shame of our country.
I'm so sorry to say that.
Is this a beautiful picture or is it a terrible picture?
It depends upon how you look at the life of the people.
If this woman has to carry water on her head for miles and miles and miles, you cannot be celebrating that.
We should be doing something about it.
And let me tell you, with all the science and technology at our command, millions of women still carry water on their heads.
And we do not ask this question.
You must have taken tea in the morning.
Think for a minute.
The leaves of the tea, plucked from the bushes; you know what the action is? The action is: The lady picks up a few leaves, puts them in the basket on the backside.
Just do it 10 times; you will realize the pain in this shoulder.
And she does it a few thousand times every day.
The rice that you ate in the lunch, and you will eat today, is transplanted by women bending in a very awkward posture, millions of them, every season, in the paddy season, when they transplant paddy with their feet in the water.
And feet in the water will develop fungus, infections, and that infection pains because then other insects bite that point.
And every year, 99.9 percent of the paddy is transplanted manually.
No machines have been developed.
So the silence of scientists, of technologists, of public policy makers, of the change agent, drew our attention that this is not on, this is not on; this is not the way society will work.
This is not what our parliament would do. You know, we have a program for employment: One hundred, 250 million people have to be given jobs for 100 days by this great country.
Doing what? Breaking stones, digging earth.
So we asked a question to the parliament: Do poor have heads?
Do poor have legs, mouth and hands, but no head?
So Honey Bee Network builds upon the resource in which poor people are rich.
And what has happened?
An anonymous, faceless, nameless person gets in contact with the network, and then gets an identity.
This is what Honey Bee Network is about.
And this network grew voluntarily, continues to be voluntary, and has tried to map the minds of millions of people of our country and other parts of the world who are creative.
They could be creative in terms of education, they may be creative in terms of culture, they may be creative in terms of institutions; but a lot of our work is in the field of technological creativity, the innovations, either in terms of contemporary innovations, or in terms of traditional knowledge.
And it all begins with curiosity.
It all begins with curiosity.
This person, whom we met -- and you will see it on the website, www.sristi.org -- this tribal person, he had a wish.
And he said, "If my wish gets fulfilled" -- somebody was sick and he had to monitor -- "God, please cure him.
And if you cure him, I will get my wall painted."
And this is what he got painted.
Somebody was talking yesterday about Maslowian hierarchy.
There could be nothing more wrong than the Maslowian model of hierarchy of needs because the poorest people in this country can get enlightenment.
Kabir, Rahim, all the great Sufi saints, they were all poor people, and they had a great reason. (Applause) Please do not ever think that only after meeting your physiological needs and other needs can you be thinking about your spiritual needs or your enlightenment.
Any person anywhere is capable of rising to that highest point of attainment, only by the resolve that they have in their mind that they must achieve something.
Look at this.
We saw it in Shodh Yatra. Every six months we walk in different parts of the country.
I've walked about 4,000 kilometers in the last 12 years.
So on the wayside we found these dung cakes, which are used as a fuel.
Now, this lady, on the wall of the dung cake heap, has made a painting.
That's the only space she could express her creativity.
And she's so marvelous.
Look at this lady, Ram Timari Devi, on a grain bin. In Champaran, we had a Shodh Yatra and we were walking in the land where Gandhiji went to hear about the tragedy, pain of indigo growers.
Bhabi Mahato in Purulia and Bankura.
Look at what she has done.
The whole wall is her canvas. She's sitting there with a broom.
Is she an artisan or an artist?
Obviously she's an artist; she's a creative person.
If we can create markets for these artists, we will not have to employ them for digging earth and breaking stones.
They will be paid for what they are good at, not what they're bad at.
(Applause) Look at what Rojadeen has done.
In Motihari in Champaran, there are a lot of people who sell tea on the shack and, obviously, there's a limited market for tea.
Every morning you have tea, as well as coffee.
So he thought, why don't I convert a pressure cooker into a coffee machine?
So this is a coffee machine. Just takes a few hundred rupees.
People bring their own cooker, he attaches a valve and a steam pipe, and now he gives you espresso coffee. (Laughter) Now, this is a real, affordable coffee percolator that works on gas.
(Applause) Look at what Sheikh Jahangir has done.
A lot of poor people do not have enough grains to get ground.
So this fellow is bringing a flour-grinding machine on a two-wheeler.
If you have 500 grams, 1000, one kilogram, he will grind it for it for you; the flourmill will not grind such a small quantity.
Please understand the problem of poor people.
They have needs which have to be met efficiently in terms of energy, in terms of cost, in terms of quality.
They don't want second-standard, second-quality outputs.
But to be able to give them high-quality output you need to adapt technology to their needs.
And that is what Sheikh Jahangir did.
But that's not enough, what he did. Look at what he did here.
If you have clothes, and you don't have enough time to wash them, he brought a washing machine to your doorstep, mounted on a two-wheeler.
So here's a model where a two-wheeler washing machine ...
He is washing your clothes and drying them at your doorstep.
(Applause) You bring your water, you bring your soap, I wash the clothes for you. Charge 50 paisa, one rupee for you per lot, and a new business model can emerge.
Now, what we need is, we need people who will be able to scale them up.
Look at this.
It looks like a beautiful photograph.
But you know what it is? Can anybody guess what it is?
Somebody from India would know, of course.
It's a tawa.
It's a hot plate made of clay.
Now, what is the beauty in it?
When you have a non-stick pan, it costs about, maybe, 250 rupees, five dollars, six dollars.
This is less than a dollar and this is non-stick; it is coated with one of these food-grade materials.
And the best part is that, while you use a costly non-stick pan, you eat the so-called Teflon or Teflon-like material because after some time the stuff disappears. Where has it gone?
It has gone in your stomach. It was not meant for that. (Laughter) You know? But here in this clay hot plate, it will never go into your stomach.
So it is better, it is safer; it is affordable, it is energy-efficient.
In other words, solutions by the poor people need not be cheaper, need not be, so-called, jugaad, need not be some kind of makeshift arrangement.
They have to be better, they have to be more efficient, they have to be affordable.
And that is what Mansukh Bhai Prajapati has done.
He has designed this plate with a handle.
And now with one dollar, you can afford a better alternative than the people market is offering you.
This lady, she developed a herbal pesticide formulation.
We filed the patent for her, the National Innovation Foundation.
And who knows? Somebody will license this technology and develop marketable products, and she would get revenue.
Now, let me mention one thing: I think we need a polycentric model of development, where a large number of initiatives in different parts of the country, in different parts of the world, would solve the needs of locality in a very efficient and adaptive manner.
Higher the local fit, greater is the chance of scaling up.
In the scaling up, there's an inherent inadequacy to match the needs of the local people, point by point, with the supply that you're making.
So why are people willing to adjust with that mismatch?
Things can scale up, and they have scaled up.
For example, cell phones: We have 400 million cellphones in this country.
Now, it is possible that I use only two buttons on the cellphone, only three options on the cellphone.
It has 300 options, I'm paying for 300; I'm using only three but I'm willing to live with it, therefore it is scaling up.
But if I had to get a match to match, obviously, I would need a different design of a cellphone.
So what we're saying is that scalability should not become an enemy of sustainability.
There must be a place in the world for solutions that are only relevant for a locality, and yet, one can be able to fund them.
One of the greatest studies that we've been finding is that many times investors would ask this question -- "What is a scalable model?" -- as if the need of a community, which is only located in a space and time and has those needs only located in those places, has no legitimate right to get them for free because it's not part of a larger scale.
So either you sub-optimize your needs to a larger scale or else you remain out.
Now, the eminent model, the long-tail model tells you that small sales of a large number of books, for example, having only a few copies sold can still be a viable model.
And we must find a mechanism where people will pool in the portfolio, will invest in the portfolio, where different innovations will go to a small number of people in their localities, and yet, the overall platform of the model will become viable.
Look at what he is doing.
Saidullah Sahib is an amazing man.
At the age of 70, he is linking up something very creative.
(Music) Saidullah Sahib: I couldn't wait for the boat.
I had to meet my love.
My desperation made me an innovator.
Even love needs help from technology.
Innovation is the light of my wife, Noor.
New inventions are the passion of my life.
My technology.
(Applause) AG: Saidulluh Sahib is in Motihari, again in Champaran.
Wonderful human being, but he stills sells, at this age, honey on a cycle to earn his livelihood, because we haven't been able to convince the water park people, the lake people, in [unclear] operations.
And we have not been able to convince the fire brigade people in Mumbai -- where there was a flood a few years ago and people had to walk 20 kilometers, wading in the water -- that, look, you should have this cycle in your fire brigade office because you can then go to those lanes where your buses will not go, where your transport will not go.
So we have not yet cracked the problem of making it available as a rescue device, as a vending device during the floods in eastern India, when you have to deliver things to people in different islands where they're marooned.
But the idea has a merit. The idea has a merit.
What has Appachan done? Appachan, unfortunately, is no more, but he has left behind a message.
A very powerful message Appachan: I watch the world wake up every day.
(Music) It's not that a coconut fell on my head, and I came upon this idea.
With no money to fund my studies, I scaled new heights.
Now, they call me the local Spiderman.
My technology.
(Applause) AG: Many of you might not realize and believe that we have sold this product internationally -- what I call a G2G model, grassroots to global.
And a professor in the University of Massachusetts, in the zoology department, bought this climber because she wanted to study the insect diversity of the top of the tree canopy.
And this device makes it possible for her to take samples from a larger number of palms, rather than only a few, because otherwise she had to make a big platform and then climb her [unclear] would climb on that.
So, you know, we are advancing the frontiers of science.
Remya Jose has developed ...
you can go to the YouTube and find India Innovates and then you will find these videos.
Innovation by her when she was in class 10th: a washing machine-cum-exercising machine.
Mr. Kharai who is a physically challenged person, one and a half foot height, only.
But he has modified a two-wheeler so that he can get autonomy and freedom and flexibility.
This innovation is from the slums of Rio.
And this person, Mr. Ubirajara.
We were talking about, my friends in Brazil, how we scale up this model in China and Brazil.
And we have a very vibrant network in China, particularly, but also emerging in Brazil and other parts of the world.
This stand on the front wheel, you will not find on any cycle.
India and China have the largest number of cycles.
But this innovation emerged in Brazil.
The point is, none of us should be parochial, none of us should be so nationalistic to believe that all good ideas will come only from our country.
No, we have to have the humility to learn from knowledge of economically poor people, wherever they are.
And look at this whole range of cycle-based innovations: cycle that's a sprayer, cycle that generates energy from the shocks on the road.
I can't change the condition of the road, but I can make the cycle run faster.
That is what Kanak Das has done.
And in South Africa, we had taken our innovators, and many of us had gone there share with the colleagues in South Africa as to how innovation can become a means of liberation from the drudgery that people have.
And this is a donkey cart which they modified.
There's an axle here, of 30, 40 kg, serving no purpose.
Remove it, the cart needs one donkey less.
This is in China. This girl needed a breathing apparatus.
These three people in the village sat down and decided to think, "How do we elongate the life of this girl of our village?"
They were not related to her, but they tried to find out, "How can we use ... " They used a cycle, they put together a breathing apparatus.
And this breathing apparatus now saved the life, and she's very welcome.
There's a whole range of innovations that we have.
A car, which runs on compressed air with six paisa per kilometer.
Assam, Kanak Gogoi.
And you would not find this car in U.S. or Europe, but this is available in India.
Now, this lady, she used to do the winding of the yarn for Pochampally Saree.
In one day, 18,000 times, she had to do this winding to generate two sarees.
This is what her son has done after seven years of struggle.
She said, "Change your profession."
He said, "I can't. This is the only thing I know, but I'll invent a machine, which will solve your problem."
And this is what he did, a sewing machine in Uttar Pradesh.
So, this is what SRISTI is saying: "Give me a place to stand, and I will move the world."
I will just tell you that we are also doing a competition among children for creativity, a whole range of things.
We have sold things all over the world, from Ethiopia to Turkey to U.S. to wherever.
Products have gone to the market, a few.
These are the people whose knowledge made this Herbavate cream for eczema possible.
And here, a company which licensed this herbal pesticide put a photograph of the innovator on the packing so that every time a user uses it, it asks the user, "You can also be an innovator.
If you have an idea, send it back to us."
So, creativity counts, knowledge matters, innovations transform, incentives inspire.
And incentives: not just material, but also non-material incentives.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For me, this story begins about 15 years ago, when I was a hospice doctor at the University of Chicago.
And I was taking care of people who were dying and their families in the South Side of Chicago.
And I was observing what happened to people and their families over the course of their terminal illness.
And in my lab, I was studying the widower effect, which is a very old idea in the social sciences, going back 150 years, known as "dying of a broken heart."
So, when I die, my wife's risk of death can double, for instance, in the first year.
And I had gone to take care of one particular patient, a woman who was dying of dementia.
And in this case, unlike this couple, she was being cared for by her daughter.
And the daughter was exhausted from caring for her mother.
And the daughter's husband, he also was sick from his wife's exhaustion.
And I was driving home one day, and I get a phone call from the husband's friend, calling me because he was depressed about what was happening to his friend.
So here I get this call from this random guy that's having an experience that's being influenced by people at some social distance.
And so I suddenly realized two very simple things: First, the widowhood effect was not restricted to husbands and wives.
And second, it was not restricted to pairs of people.
And I started to see the world in a whole new way, like pairs of people connected to each other.
And then I realized that these individuals would be connected into foursomes with other pairs of people nearby.
And then, in fact, these people were embedded in other sorts of relationships: marriage and spousal and friendship and other sorts of ties.
And that, in fact, these connections were vast and that we were all embedded in this broad set of connections with each other.
So I started to see the world in a completely new way and I became obsessed with this.
I became obsessed with how it might be that we're embedded in these social networks, and how they affect our lives.
So, social networks are these intricate things of beauty, and they're so elaborate and so complex and so ubiquitous, in fact, that one has to ask what purpose they serve.
Why are we embedded in social networks?
I mean, how do they form? How do they operate?
And how do they effect us?
So my first topic with respect to this, was not death, but obesity.
It had become trendy to speak about the "obesity epidemic."
And, along with my collaborator, James Fowler, we began to wonder whether obesity really was epidemic and could it spread from person to person like the four people I discussed earlier.
So this is a slide of some of our initial results.
It's 2,200 people in the year 2000.
Every dot is a person. We make the dot size proportional to people's body size; so bigger dots are bigger people.
In addition, if your body size, if your BMI, your body mass index, is above 30 -- if you're clinically obese -- we also colored the dots yellow.
So, if you look at this image, right away you might be able to see that there are clusters of obese and non-obese people in the image.
But the visual complexity is still very high.
It's not obvious exactly what's going on.
In addition, some questions are immediately raised: How much clustering is there?
Is there more clustering than would be due to chance alone?
How big are the clusters? How far do they reach?
And, most importantly, what causes the clusters?
So we did some mathematics to study the size of these clusters.
This here shows, on the Y-axis, the increase in the probability that a person is obese given that a social contact of theirs is obese and, on the X-axis, the degrees of separation between the two people.
On the far left, you see the purple line.
It says that, if your friends are obese, your risk of obesity is 45 percent higher.
And the next bar over, the [red] line, says if your friend's friends are obese, your risk of obesity is 25 percent higher.
And then the next line over says if your friend's friend's friend, someone you probably don't even know, is obese, your risk of obesity is 10 percent higher.
And it's only when you get to your friend's friend's friend's friends that there's no longer a relationship between that person's body size and your own body size.
Well, what might be causing this clustering?
There are at least three possibilities: One possibility is that, as I gain weight, it causes you to gain weight.
A kind of induction, a kind of spread from person to person.
Another possibility, very obvious, is homophily, or, birds of a feather flock together; here, I form my tie to you because you and I share a similar body size.
And the last possibility is what is known as confounding, because it confounds our ability to figure out what's going on.
And here, the idea is not that my weight gain is causing your weight gain, nor that I preferentially form a tie with you because you and I share the same body size, but rather that we share a common exposure to something, like a health club that makes us both lose weight at the same time.
When we studied these data, we found evidence for all of these things, including for induction.
And we found that if your friend becomes obese, it increases your risk of obesity by about 57 percent in the same given time period.
There can be many mechanisms for this effect: One possibility is that your friends say to you something like -- you know, they adopt a behavior that spreads to you -- like, they say, "Let's go have muffins and beer," which is a terrible combination. (Laughter) But you adopt that combination, and then you start gaining weight like them.
Another more subtle possibility is that they start gaining weight, and it changes your ideas of what an acceptable body size is.
Here, what's spreading from person to person is not a behavior, but rather a norm: An idea is spreading.
Now, headline writers had a field day with our studies.
I think the headline in The New York Times was, "Are you packing it on?
Blame your fat friends." (Laughter) What was interesting to us is that the European headline writers had a different take: They said, "Are your friends gaining weight? Perhaps you are to blame."
(Laughter) And we thought this was a very interesting comment on America, and a kind of self-serving, "not my responsibility" kind of phenomenon.
Now, I want to be very clear: We do not think our work should or could justify prejudice against people of one or another body size at all.
Our next questions was: Could we actually visualize this spread?
Was weight gain in one person actually spreading to weight gain in another person?
And this was complicated because we needed to take into account the fact that the network structure, the architecture of the ties, was changing across time.
In addition, because obesity is not a unicentric epidemic, there's not a Patient Zero of the obesity epidemic -- if we find that guy, there was a spread of obesity out from him -- it's a multicentric epidemic.
Lots of people are doing things at the same time.
And I'm about to show you a 30 second video animation that took me and James five years of our lives to do.
So, again, every dot is a person.
Every tie between them is a relationship.
We're going to put this into motion now, taking daily cuts through the network for about 30 years.
The dot sizes are going to grow, you're going to see a sea of yellow take over.
You're going to see people be born and die -- dots will appear and disappear -- ties will form and break, marriages and divorces, friendings and defriendings.
A lot of complexity, a lot is happening just in this 30-year period that includes the obesity epidemic.
And, by the end, you're going to see clusters of obese and non-obese individuals within the network.
Now, when looked at this, it changed the way I see things, because this thing, this network that's changing across time, it has a memory, it moves, things flow within it, it has a kind of consistency -- people can die, but it doesn't die; it still persists -- and it has a kind of resilience that allows it to persist across time.
And so, I came to see these kinds of social networks as living things, as living things that we could put under a kind of microscope to study and analyze and understand.
And we used a variety of techniques to do this.
And we started exploring all kinds of other phenomena.
We looked at smoking and drinking behavior, and voting behavior, and divorce -- which can spread -- and altruism.
And, eventually, we became interested in emotions.
Now, when we have emotions, we show them.
Why do we show our emotions?
I mean, there would be an advantage to experiencing our emotions inside, you know, anger or happiness.
But we don't just experience them, we show them.
And not only do we show them, but others can read them.
And, not only can they read them, but they copy them.
There's emotional contagion that takes place in human populations.
And so this function of emotions suggests that, in addition to any other purpose they serve, they're a kind of primitive form of communication.
And that, in fact, if we really want to understand human emotions, we need to think about them in this way.
Now, we're accustomed to thinking about emotions in this way, in simple, sort of, brief periods of time.
So, for example, I was giving this talk recently in New York City, and I said, "You know when you're on the subway and the other person across the subway car smiles at you, and you just instinctively smile back?"
And they looked at me and said, "We don't do that in New York City." (Laughter) And I said, "Everywhere else in the world, that's normal human behavior."
And so there's a very instinctive way in which we briefly transmit emotions to each other.
And, in fact, emotional contagion can be broader still.
Like we could have punctuated expressions of anger, as in riots.
The question that we wanted to ask was: Could emotion spread, in a more sustained way than riots, across time and involve large numbers of people, not just this pair of individuals smiling at each other in the subway car?
Maybe there's a kind of below the surface, quiet riot that animates us all the time.
Maybe there are emotional stampedes that ripple through social networks.
Maybe, in fact, emotions have a collective existence, not just an individual existence.
And this is one of the first images we made to study this phenomenon.
Again, a social network, but now we color the people yellow if they're happy and blue if they're sad and green in between.
And if you look at this image, you can right away see clusters of happy and unhappy people, again, spreading to three degrees of separation.
And you might form the intuition that the unhappy people occupy a different structural location within the network.
There's a middle and an edge to this network, and the unhappy people seem to be located at the edges.
So to invoke another metaphor, if you imagine social networks as a kind of vast fabric of humanity -- I'm connected to you and you to her, on out endlessly into the distance -- this fabric is actually like an old-fashioned American quilt, and it has patches on it: happy and unhappy patches.
And whether you become happy or not depends in part on whether you occupy a happy patch.
(Laughter) So, this work with emotions, which are so fundamental, then got us to thinking about: Maybe the fundamental causes of human social networks are somehow encoded in our genes.
Because human social networks, whenever they are mapped, always kind of look like this: the picture of the network.
But they never look like this.
Why do they not look like this?
Why don't we form human social networks that look like a regular lattice?
Well, the striking patterns of human social networks, their ubiquity and their apparent purpose beg questions about whether we evolved to have human social networks in the first place, and whether we evolved to form networks with a particular structure.
And notice first of all -- so, to understand this, though, we need to dissect network structure a little bit first -- and notice that every person in this network has exactly the same structural location as every other person.
But that's not the case with real networks.
So, for example, here is a real network of college students at an elite northeastern university.
And now I'm highlighting a few dots.
If you look here at the dots, compare node B in the upper left to node D in the far right; B has four friends coming out from him and D has six friends coming out from him.
And so, those two individuals have different numbers of friends.
That's very obvious, we all know that.
But certain other aspects of social network structure are not so obvious.
Compare node B in the upper left to node A in the lower left.
Now, those people both have four friends, but A's friends all know each other, and B's friends do not.
So the friend of a friend of A's is, back again, a friend of A's, whereas the friend of a friend of B's is not a friend of B's, but is farther away in the network.
This is known as transitivity in networks.
And, finally, compare nodes C and D: C and D both have six friends.
If you talk to them, and you said, "What is your social life like?"
they would say, "I've got six friends.
That's my social experience."
But now we, with a bird's eye view looking at this network, can see that they occupy very different social worlds.
And I can cultivate that intuition in you by just asking you: Who would you rather be if a deadly germ was spreading through the network?
Would you rather be C or D?
You'd rather be D, on the edge of the network.
And now who would you rather be if a juicy piece of gossip -- not about you -- was spreading through the network? (Laughter) Now, you would rather be C.
So different structural locations have different implications for your life.
And, in fact, when we did some experiments looking at this, what we found is that 46 percent of the variation in how many friends you have is explained by your genes.
And this is not surprising. We know that some people are born shy and some are born gregarious. That's obvious.
But we also found some non-obvious things.
For instance, 47 percent in the variation in whether your friends know each other is attributable to your genes.
Whether your friends know each other has not just to do with their genes, but with yours.
And we think the reason for this is that some people like to introduce their friends to each other -- you know who you are -- and others of you keep them apart and don't introduce your friends to each other.
And so some people knit together the networks around them, creating a kind of dense web of ties in which they're comfortably embedded.
And finally, we even found that 30 percent of the variation in whether or not people are in the middle or on the edge of the network can also be attributed to their genes.
So whether you find yourself in the middle or on the edge is also partially heritable.
Now, what is the point of this?
How does this help us understand?
How does this help us figure out some of the problems that are affecting us these days?
Well, the argument I'd like to make is that networks have value.
They are a kind of social capital.
New properties emerge because of our embeddedness in social networks, and these properties inhere in the structure of the networks, not just in the individuals within them.
So think about these two common objects.
They're both made of carbon, and yet one of them has carbon atoms in it that are arranged in one particular way -- on the left -- and you get graphite, which is soft and dark.
But if you take the same carbon atoms and interconnect them a different way, you get diamond, which is clear and hard.
And those properties of softness and hardness and darkness and clearness do not reside in the carbon atoms; they reside in the interconnections between the carbon atoms, or at least arise because of the interconnections between the carbon atoms.
So, similarly, the pattern of connections among people confers upon the groups of people different properties.
It is the ties between people that makes the whole greater than the sum of its parts.
And so it is not just what's happening to these people -- whether they're losing weight or gaining weight, or becoming rich or becoming poor, or becoming happy or not becoming happy -- that affects us; it's also the actual architecture of the ties around us.
Our experience of the world depends on the actual structure of the networks in which we're residing and on all the kinds of things that ripple and flow through the network.
Now, the reason, I think, that this is the case is that human beings assemble themselves and form a kind of superorganism.
Now, a superorganism is a collection of individuals which show or evince behaviors or phenomena that are not reducible to the study of individuals and that must be understood by reference to, and by studying, the collective.
Like, for example, a hive of bees that's finding a new nesting site, or a flock of birds that's evading a predator, or a flock of birds that's able to pool its wisdom and navigate and find a tiny speck of an island in the middle of the Pacific, or a pack of wolves that's able to bring down larger prey.
Superorganisms have properties that cannot be understood just by studying the individuals.
I think understanding social networks and how they form and operate can help us understand not just health and emotions but all kinds of other phenomena -- like crime, and warfare, and economic phenomena like bank runs and market crashes and the adoption of innovation and the spread of product adoption.
Now, look at this.
I think we form social networks because the benefits of a connected life outweigh the costs.
If I was always violent towards you or gave you misinformation or made you sad or infected you with deadly germs, you would cut the ties to me, and the network would disintegrate.
So the spread of good and valuable things is required to sustain and nourish social networks.
Similarly, social networks are required for the spread of good and valuable things, like love and kindness and happiness and altruism and ideas.
I think, in fact, that if we realized how valuable social networks are, we'd spend a lot more time nourishing them and sustaining them, because I think social networks are fundamentally related to goodness.
And what I think the world needs now is more connections.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We invent.
My company invents all kinds of new technology in lots of different areas.
And we do that for a couple of reasons.
We invent for fun -- invention is a lot of fun to do -- and we also invent for profit.
The two are related because the profit actually takes long enough that if it isn't fun, you wouldn't have the time to do it.
So we do this fun and profit-oriented inventing for most of what we do, but we also have a program where we invent for humanity -- where we take some of our best inventors, and we say, "Are there problems where we have a good idea for solving a problem the world has?" -- and to solve it in the way we try to solve problems, which is with dramatic, crazy, out-of-the-box solutions.
Bill Gates is one of those smartest guys of ours that work on these problems and he also funds this work, so thank you.
So I'm going to briefly discuss a couple of problems that we have and a couple of problems where we've got some solutions underway.
Vaccination is one of the key techniques in public health, a fantastic thing.
But in the developing world a lot of vaccines spoil before they're administered, and that's because they need to be kept cold.
Almost all vaccines need to be kept at refrigerator temperatures.
They go bad very quickly if you don't, and if you don't have stable power grid, this doesn't happen, so kids die.
It's not just the loss of the vaccine that matters; it's the fact that those kids don't get vaccinated.
This is one of the ways that vaccines are carried: These are Styrofoam chests. These are being carried by people, but they're also put on the backs of pickup trucks.
We've got a different solution.
Now, one of these Styrofoam chests will last for about four hours with ice in it.
And we thought, well, that's not really good enough.
So we made this thing.
This lasts six months with no power; absolutely zero power, because it loses less than a half a watt.
Now, this is our second generations prototype.
The third generation prototype is, right now, in Uganda being tested.
Now, the reason we were able to come up with this is two key ideas: One is that this is similar to a cryogenic Dewar, something you'd keep liquid nitrogen or liquid helium in.
They have incredible insulation, so let's put some incredible insulation here.
The other idea is kind of interesting, which is, you can't reach inside anymore.
Because if you open it up and reach inside, you'd let the heat in, the game would be over.
So the inside of this thing actually looks like a Coke machine.
It vends out little individual vials.
So a simple idea, which we hope is going to change the way vaccines are distributed in Africa and around the world.
We'll move on to malaria.
Malaria is one of the great public health problems.
Esther Duflo talked a little bit about this.
Two hundred million people a year.
Every 43 seconds a child in Africa dies; 27 will die during my talk.
And there's no way for us here in this country to grasp really what that means to the people involved.
Another comment of Esther's was that we react when there's a tragedy like Haiti, but that tragedy is ongoing.
So what can we do about it?
Well, there are a lot of things people have tried for many years for solving malaria.
You can spray; the problem is there are environmental issues.
You can try to treat people and create awareness.
That's great, except the places that have malaria really bad, they don't have health care systems.
A vaccine would be a terrific thing, only they don't work yet.
People have tried for a long time. There are a couple of interesting candidates.
It's a very difficult thing to make a vaccine for.
You can distribute bed nets, and bed nets are very effective if you use them.
You don't always use them for that. People fish with them.
They don't always get to everyone.
And bed nets have an effect on the epidemic, but you're never going to make it extinct with bed nets.
Now, malaria is an incredibly complicated disease.
We could spend hours going over this.
It's got this sort of soap opera-like lifestyle; they have sex, they burrow into your liver, they tunnel into your blood cells ...
it's an incredibly complicated disease, but that's actually one of the things we find interesting about it and why we work on malaria: There's a lot of potential ways in.
One of those ways might be better diagnosis.
So we hope this year to prototype each of these devices.
One does an automatic malaria diagnosis in the same way that a diabetic's glucose meter works: You take a drop of blood, you put it in there and it automatically tells you.
Today, you need to do a complicated laboratory procedure, create a bunch of microscope slides and have a trained person examine it.
The other thing is, you know, it would be even better if you didn't have to draw the blood.
And if you look through the eye, or you look at the vessels on the white of the eye, in fact, you may be able to do this directly, without drawing any blood at all, or through your nail beds.
Because if you actually look through your fingernails, you can see blood vessels, and once you see blood vessels, we think we can see the malaria.
We can see it because of this molecule called hemozoin.
It's produced by the malaria parasite and it's a very interesting crystalline substance.
Interesting, anyway, if you're a solid-state physicist.
There's a lot of cool stuff we can do with it.
This is our femtosecond laser lab.
So this creates pulses of light that last a femtosecond.
That's really, really, really short.
This is a pulse of light that's only about one wavelength of light long, so it's a whole bunch of photons all coming and hitting simultaneously.
It creates a very high peak power and it lets you do all kinds of interesting things; in particular, it lets you find hemozoin.
So here's an image of red blood cells, and now we can actually map where the hemozoin and where the malaria parasites are inside those red blood cells.
And using both this technique and other optical techniques, we think we can make those diagnostics.
We also have another hemozoin-oriented therapy for malaria: a way, in acute cases, to actually take the malaria parasite and filter it out of the blood system.
Sort of like doing dialysis, but for relieving the parasite load.
This is our thousand-core supercomputer.
We're kind of software guys, and so nearly any problem that you pose, we like to try to solve with some software.
One of the problems that you have if you're trying to eradicate malaria or reduce it is you don't know what's the most effective thing to do.
Okay, we heard about bed nets earlier.
You spend a certain amount per bed net.
Or you could spray.
You can give drug administration.
There's all these different interventions but they have different kinds of effectiveness.
How can you tell?
So we've created, using our supercomputer, the world's best computer model of malaria, which we'll show you now.
We picked Madagascar.
We have every road, every village, every, almost, square inch of Madagascar.
We have all of the precipitation data and the temperature data.
That's very important because the humidity and precipitation tell you whether you've got standing pools of water for the mosquitoes to breed.
So that sets the stage on which you do this.
You then have to introduce the mosquitoes, and you have to model that and how they come and go.
Ultimately, it gives you this.
This is malaria spreading across Madagascar.
And this is this latter part of the rainy season.
We're going to the dry season now.
It nearly goes away in the dry season, because there's no place for the mosquitoes to breed.
And then, of course, the next year it comes roaring back.
By doing these kinds of simulations, we want to eradicate or control malaria thousands of times in software before we actually have to do it in real life; to be able to simulate both the economic trade-offs -- how many bed nets versus how much spraying? -- or the social trade-offs -- what happens if unrest breaks out?
We also try to study our foe.
This is a high-speed camera view of a mosquito.
And, in a moment, we're going to see a view of the airflow.
Here, we're trying to visualize the airflow around the wings of the mosquito with little particles we're illuminating with a laser.
By understanding how mosquitoes fly, we hope to understand how to make them not fly.
Now, one of the ways you can make them not fly is with DDT.
This is a real ad.
This is one of those things you just can't make up.
Once upon a time, this was the primary technique, and, in fact, many countries got rid of malaria through DDT.
The United States did.
In 1935, there were 150,000 cases a year of malaria in the United States, but DDT and a massive public health effort managed to squelch it.
So we thought, "Well, we've done all these things that are focused on the Plasmodium, the parasite involved.
What can we do to the mosquito?
Well, let's try to kill it with consumer electronics."
Now, that sounds silly, but each of these devices has something interesting in it that maybe you could use.
Your Blu-ray player has a very cheap blue laser.
Your laser printer has a mirror galvanometer that's used to steer a laser beam very accurately; that's what makes those little dots on the page.
And, of course, there's signal processing and digital cameras.
So what if we could put all that together to shoot them out of the sky with lasers?
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, in our company, this is what we call "the pinky-suck moment."
(Laughter) What if we could do that?
Now, just suspend disbelief for a moment, and let's think of what could happen if we could do that.
Well, we could protect very high-value targets like clinics.
Clinics are full of people that have malaria.
They're sick, and so they're less able to defend themselves from the mosquitoes.
You really want to protect them.
Of course, if you do that, you could also protect your backyard.
And farmers could protect their crops that they want to sell to Whole Foods because our photons are 100 percent organic. (Laughter) They're completely natural.
Now, it actually gets better than this.
You could, if you're really smart, you could shine a nonlethal laser on the bug before you zap it, and you could listen to the wing beat frequency and you could measure the size.
And then you could decide: "Is this an insect I want to kill, or an insect I don't want to kill?"
Moore's law made computing cheap; so cheap we can weigh the life of an individual insect and decide thumbs up or thumbs down. (Laughter) Now, it turns out we only kill the female mosquitoes.
They're the only ones that are dangerous.
Mosquitoes only drink blood to lay eggs.
Mosquitoes actually live ... their day-to-day nutrition comes from nectar, from flowers -- in fact, in the lab, we feed ours raisins -- but the female needs the blood meal.
So, this sounds really crazy, right?
Would you like to see it?
Audience: Yeah!
Nathan Myhrvold: Okay, so our legal department prepared a disclaimer, and here it is.
(Laughter) Now, after thinking about this a little bit we thought, you know, it probably would be simpler to do this with a nonlethal laser.
So, Eric Johanson, who built the device, actually, with parts from eBay; and Pablos Holman over here, he's got mosquitoes in the tank.
We have the device over here.
And we're going to show you, instead of the kill laser, which will be a very brief, instantaneous pulse, we're going to have a green laser pointer that's going to stay on the mosquito for, actually, quite a long period of time; otherwise, you can't see it very well.
Take it away Eric.
Eric Johanson: What we have here is a tank on the other side of the stage.
And we have ... this computer screen can actually see the mosquitoes as they fly around.
And Pablos, if he stirs up our mosquitoes a little bit we can see them flying around.
Now, that's a fairly straightforward image processing routine, and let me show you how it works.
Here you can see that the insects are being tracked as they're flying around, which is kind of fun.
Next we can actually light them up with a laser. (Laughter) Now, this is a low powered laser, and we can actually pick up a wing-beat frequency.
So you may be able to hear some mosquitoes flying around.
NM: That's a mosquito wing beat you're hearing.
EJ: Finally, let's see what this looks like.
There you can see mosquitoes as they fly around, being lit up.
This is slowed way down so that you have an opportunity to see what's happening.
Here we have it running at high-speed mode.
So this system that was built for TED is here to illustrate that it is technically possible to actually deploy a system like this, and we're looking very hard at how to make it highly cost-effective to use in places like Africa and other parts of the world.
(Applause) NM: So it wouldn't be any fun to show you that without showing you what actually happens when we hit 'em.
(Laughter) (Laughter) This is very satisfying.
(Laughter) This is one of the first ones we did.
The energy's a little bit high here.
(Laughter) We'll loop around here in just a second, and you'll see another one.
Here's another one. Bang.
An interesting thing is, we kill them all the time; we've never actually gotten the wings to shut off in midair.
The wing motor is very resilient.
I mean, here we're blowing wings off but the wing motor keeps all the way down.
So, that's what I have. Thanks very much.
(Applause)
I'm going to tell you two things today: One is what we have lost, and two, a way to bring it back.
And let me start with this.
This is my baseline: This is the Mediterranean coast with no fish, bare rock and lots of sea urchins that like to eat the algae.
Something like this is what I first saw when I jumped in the water for the first time in the Mediterranean coast off Spain.
Now, if an alien came to earth -- let's call him Joe -- what would Joe see?
If Joe jumped in a coral reef, there are many things the alien could see.
Very unlikely, Joe would jump on a pristine coral reef, a virgin coral reef with lots of coral, sharks, crocodiles, manatees, groupers, turtles, etc.
So, probably, what Joe would see would be in this part, in the greenish part of the picture.
Here we have the extreme with dead corals, microbial soup and jellyfish.
And where the diver is, this is probably where most of the reefs of the world are now, with very few corals, algae overgrowing the corals, lots of bacteria, and where the large animals are gone.
And this is what most marine scientists have seen too.
This is their baseline. This is what they think is natural because we started modern science with scuba diving long after we started degrading marine ecosystems.
So I'm going to get us all on a time machine, and we're going to the left; we're going to go back to the past to see what the ocean was like.
And let's start with this time machine, the Line Islands, where we have conducted a series of National Geographic expeditions.
This sea is an archipelago belonging to Kiribati that spans across the equator and it has several uninhabited, unfished, pristine islands and a few inhabited islands.
So let's start with the first one: Christmas Island, over 5,000 people.
Most of the reefs are dead, most of the corals are dead -- overgrown by algae -- and most of the fish are smaller than the pencils we use to count them.
We did 250 hours of diving here in 2005.
We didn't see a single shark.
This is the place that Captain Cook discovered in 1777 and he described a huge abundance of sharks biting the rudders and the oars of their small boats while they were going ashore.
Let's move the dial a little bit to the past.
Fanning Island, 2,500 people.
The corals are doing better here. Lots of small fish.
This is what many divers would consider paradise.
This is where you can see most of the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary.
And many people think this is really, really beautiful, if this is your baseline.
If we go back to a place like Palmyra Atoll, where I was with Jeremy Jackson a few years ago, the corals are doing better and there are sharks.
You can see sharks in every single dive.
And this is something that is very unusual in today's coral reefs.
But then, if we shift the dial 200, 500 years back, then we get to the places where the corals are absolutely healthy and gorgeous, forming spectacular structures, and where the predators are the most conspicuous thing, where you see between 25 and 50 sharks per dive.
What have we learned from these places?
This is what we thought was natural.
This is what we call the biomass pyramid.
If we get all of the fish of a coral reef together and weigh them, this is what we would expect.
Most of the biomass is low on the food chain, the herbivores, the parrotfish, the surgeonfish that eat the algae.
Then the plankton feeders, these little damselfish, the little animals floating in the water.
And then we have a lower biomass of carnivores, and a lower biomass of top head, or the sharks, the large snappers, the large groupers.
But this is a consequence.
This view of the world is a consequence of having studied degraded reefs.
When we went to pristine reefs, we realized that the natural world was upside down; this pyramid was inverted.
The top head does account for most of the biomass, in some places up to 85 percent, like Kingman Reef, which is now protected.
The good news is that, in addition to having more predators, there's more of everything.
The size of these boxes is bigger.
We have more sharks, more biomass of snappers, more biomass of herbivores, too, like these parrot fish that are like marine goats.
They clean the reef; everything that grows enough to be seen, they eat, and they keep the reef clean and allow the corals to replenish.
Not only do these places -- these ancient, pristine places -- have lots of fish, but they also have other important components of the ecosystem like the giant clams; pavements of giant clams in the lagoons, up to 20, 25 per square meter.
These have disappeared from every inhabited reef in the world, and they filter the water; they keep the water clean from microbes and pathogens.
But still, now we have global warming.
If we don't have fishing because these reefs are protected by law or their remoteness, this is great.
But the water gets warmer for too long and the corals die.
So how are these fish, these predators going to help?
Well, what we have seen is that in this particular area during El Nino, year '97, '98, the water was too warm for too long, and many corals bleached and many died.
In Christmas, where the food web is really trimmed down, where the large animals are gone, the corals have not recovered.
In Fanning Island, the corals are not recovered.
But you see here a big table coral that died and collapsed.
And the fish have grazed the algae, so the turf of algae is a little lower.
Then you go to Palmyra Atoll that has more biomass of herbivores, and the dead corals are clean, and the corals are coming back.
And when you go to the pristine side, did this ever bleach?
These places bleached too, but they recovered faster.
The more intact, the more complete, [and] the more complex your food web, the higher the resilience, [and] the more likely that the system is going to recover from the short-term impacts of warming events.
And that's good news, so we need to recover that structure.
We need to make sure that all of the pieces of the ecosystem are there so the ecosystem can adapt to the effects of global warming.
So if we have to reset the baseline, if we have to push the ecosystem back to the left, how can we do it?
Well, there are several ways.
One very clear way is the marine protected areas, especially no-take reserves that we set aside to allow for the recovery for marine life.
And let me go back to that image of the Mediterranean.
This was my baseline. This is what I saw when I was a kid.
And at the same time I was watching Jacques Cousteau's shows on TV, with all this richness and abundance and diversity.
And I thought that this richness belonged to tropical seas, and that the Mediterranean was a naturally poor sea.
But, little did I know, until I jumped for the first time in a marine reserve.
And this is what I saw, lots of fish.
After a few years, between five and seven years, fish come back, they eat the urchins, and then the algae grow again.
So you have this little algal forest, and in the size of a laptop you can find more than 100 species of algae, mostly microscopic fit hundreds of species of little animals that then feed the fish, so that the system recovers.
And this particular place, the Medes Islands Marine Reserve, is only 94 hectares, and it brings 6 million euros to the local economy, 20 times more than fishing, and it represents 88 percent of all the tourist revenue.
So these places not only help the ecosystem but also help the people who can benefit from the ecosystem.
So let me just give you a summary of what no-take reserves do.
These places, when we protect them, if we compare them to unprotected areas nearby, this is what happens.
The number of species increases 21 percent; so if you have 1,000 species you would expect 200 more in a marine reserve.
This is very substantial.
The size of organisms increases a third, so your fish are now this big.
The abundance, how many fish you have per square meter, increases almost 170 percent.
And the biomass -- this is the most spectacular change -- 4.5 times greater biomass on average, just after five to seven years.
In some places up to 10 times larger biomass inside the reserves.
So we have all these things inside the reserve that grow, and what do they do?
They reproduce. That's population biology 101.
If you don't kill the fish, they take a longer time to die, they grow larger and they reproduce a lot.
And same thing for invertebrates. This is the example.
These are egg cases laid by a snail off the coast of Chile, and this is how many eggs they lay on the bottom.
Outside the reserve, you cannot even detect this.
One point three million eggs per square meter inside the marine reserve where these snails are very abundant.
So these organisms reproduce, the little larvae juveniles spill over, they all spill over, and then people can benefit from them outside too.
This is in the Bahamas: Nassau grouper.
Huge abundance of groupers inside the reserve, and the closer you get to the reserve, the more fish you have.
So the fishermen are catching more.
You can see where the limits of the reserve are because you see the boats lined up.
So there is spill over; there are benefits beyond the boundaries of these reserves that help people around them, while at the same time the reserve is protecting the entire habitat. It is building resilience.
So what we have now -- or a world without reserves -- is like a debit account where we withdraw all the time and we never make any deposit.
Reserves are like savings accounts.
We have this principal that we don't touch; that produces returns, social, economic and ecological.
And if we think about the increase of biomass inside the reserves, this is like compound interest.
Two examples, again, of how these reserves can benefit people.
This is how much fishermen get everyday in Kenya, fishing over a series of years, in a place where there is no protection; it's a free-for-all.
Once the most degrading fishing gear, seine nets, were removed, the fishermen were catching more.
If you fish less, you're actually catching more.
But if we add the no-take reserve on top of that, the fishermen are still making more money by fishing less around an area that is protected.
Another example: Nassau groupers in Belize in the Mesoamerican Reef.
This is grouper sex, and the groupers aggregate around the full moons of December and January for a week.
They used to aggregate up to the tens of thousands, 30,000 groupers about this big in one hectare, in one aggregation.
Fishermen knew about these things; they caught them, and they depleted them.
When I went there for the first time in 2000, there were only 3,000 groupers left.
And the fishermen were authorized to catch 30 percent of the entire spawning population every year.
So we did a simple analysis, and it doesn't take rocket science to figure out that, if you take 30 percent every year, your fishery is going to collapse very quickly.
And with the fishery, the entire reproductive ability of the species goes extinct.
It happened in many places around the Caribbean.
And they would make 4,000 dollars per year, total, for the entire fishery, several fishing boats.
Now, if you do an economic analysis and project what would happen if the fish were not cut, if we brought just 20 divers one month per year, the revenue would be more than 20 times higher and that would be sustainable over time.
So how much of this do we have?
If this is so good, if this is such a no-brainer, how much of this do we have?
And you already heard that less than one percent of the ocean's protected.
We're getting closer to one percent now, thanks to the protections of the Chagos Archipelago, and only a fraction of this is fully protected from fishing.
Scientific studies recommend that at least 20 percent of the ocean should be protected.
The estimated range is between 20 and 50 percent for a series of goals of biodiversity and fishery enhancement and resilience.
Now, is this possible? People would ask: How much would that cost?
Well, let's think about how much we are paying now to subsidize fishing: 35 billion dollars per year.
Many of these subsidies go to destructive fishing practices.
Well, there are a couple estimates of how much it would cost to create a network of protected areas covering 20 percent of the ocean that would be only a fraction of what we are now paying; the government hands out to a fishery that is collapsing.
People are losing their jobs because the fisheries are collapsing.
A creation of a network of reserves would provide direct employment for more than a million people plus all the secondary jobs and all the secondary benefits.
So how can we do that?
If it's so clear that these savings accounts are good for the environment and for people, why don't we have 20, 50 percent of the ocean?
And how can we reach that goal?
Well, there are two ways of getting there.
The trivial solution is to create really large protected areas like the Chagos Archipelago.
The problem is that we can create these large reserves only in places where there are no people, where there is no social conflict, where the political cost is really low and the economic cost is also low.
And a few of us, a few organizations in this room and elsewhere are working on this.
But what about the rest of the coast of the world, where people live and make a living out of fishing?
Well, there are three main reasons why we don't have tens of thousands of small reserves: The first one is that people have no idea what marine reserves do, and fishermen tend to be really, really defensive when it comes to regulating or closing an area, even if it's small.
Second, the governance is not right because most coastal communities around the world don't have the authority to monitor the resources to create the reserve and enforce it.
It's a top down hierarchical structure where people wait for government agents to come and this is not effective. And the government doesn't have enough resources.
Which takes us to the third reason, why we don't have many more reserves, is that the funding models have been wrong.
NGOs and governments spend a lot of time and energy and resources in a few small areas, usually.
So marine conservation and coastal protection has become a sink for government or philanthropic money, and this is not sustainable.
So the solutions are just fixing these three issues.
First, we need to develop a global awareness campaign to inspire local communities and governments to create no-take reserves that are better than what we have now.
It's the savings accounts versus the debit accounts with no deposits.
Second, we need to redesign our governance so conservation efforts can be decentralized, so conservation efforts don't depend on work from NGOs or from government agencies and can be created by the local communities, like it happens in the Philippines and a few other places.
And third, and very important, we need to develop new business models.
The philanthropy sink as the only way to create reserves is not sustainable.
We really need to develop models, business models, where coastal conservation is an investment, because we already know that these marine reserves provide social, ecological and economic benefits.
And I'd like to finish with one thought, which is that no one organization alone is going to save the ocean.
There has been a lot of competition in the past, and we need to develop a new model of partnership, truly collaborative, where we are looking for complementing, not substituting.
The stakes are just too high to continue the way we are going.
So let's do that. Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you Enric.
Enric Sala: Thank you.
CA: That was a masterful job of pulling things together.
First of all, your pyramid, your inverted pyramid, showing 85 percent biomass in the predators, that seems impossible.
How could 85 percent survive on 15 percent?
ES: Well, imagine that you have two gears of a watch, a big one and a small one.
The big one is moving very slowly, and the small one is moving fast.
That's basically it.
The animals at the lower parts of the food chain, they reproduce very fast; they grow really fast; they produce millions of eggs.
Up there, you have sharks and large fish that live 25, 30 years.
They reproduce very slowly; they have a slow metabolism; and, basically, they just maintain their biomass.
So, basically, the production surplus of these guys down there is enough to maintain this biomass that is not moving.
They are like capacitors of the system.
CA: That's very fascinating.
So, really, our picture of a food pyramid is just -- we have to change that completely.
ES: At least in the seas.
What we found in coral reefs is that the inverted pyramid is the equivalent of the Serengeti, with five lions per wildebeest.
And on land, this cannot work.
But at least on coral reefs are systems where there is a bottom component with structure.
We think this is universal.
But we have started studying pristine reefs only very recently.
CA: So the numbers you presented really are astonishing.
You're saying we're spending 35 billion dollars now on subsidies.
It would only cost 16 billion to set up 20 percent of the ocean as marine protected areas that actually give new living choices to the fishermen as well.
If the world was a smarter place, we could solve this problem for negative 19 billion dollars.
We've got 19 billion to spend on health care or something.
ES: And then we have the under-performance of fisheries that is 50 billion dollars.
So again, one of the big solutions is have the World Trade Organization shifting the subsidies to sustainable practices.
CA: Okay, so there's a lot of examples that I'm hearing out there about ending this subsidies madness.
So thank you for those numbers.
The last one's a personal question.
A lot of the experience of people here who've been in the oceans for a long time has just been seeing this degradation, the places they saw that were beautiful getting worse, depressing.
Talk to me about the feeling that you must have experienced of going to these pristine areas and seeing things coming back.
ES: It is a spiritual experience.
We go there to try to understand the ecosystems, to try to measure or count fish and sharks and see how these places are different from the places we know.
But the best feeling is this biophilia that E.O. Wilson talks about, where humans have this sense of awe and wonder in front of untamed nature, of raw nature.
And there, only there, you really feel that you are part of a larger thing or of a larger global ecosystem.
And if it were not for these places that show hope, I don't think I could continue doing this job.
It would be just too depressing.
CA: Well, Enric, thank you so much for sharing some of that spiritual experience with us all. Thank you.
ES: Thank you very much.
Can I ask you to please recall a time when you really loved something -- a movie, an album, a song or a book -- and you recommended it wholeheartedly to someone you also really liked, and you anticipated that reaction, you waited for it, and it came back, and the person hated it?
So, by way of introduction, that is the exact same state in which I spent every working day of the last six years. (Laughter) I teach high school math.
I sell a product to a market that doesn't want it, but is forced by law to buy it.
I mean, it's just a losing proposition.
So there's a useful stereotype about students that I see, a useful stereotype about you all.
I could give you guys an algebra-two final exam, and I would expect no higher than a 25 percent pass rate.
And both of these facts say less about you or my students than they do about what we call math education in the U.S. today.
To start with, I'd like to break math down into two categories.
One is computation; this is the stuff you've forgotten.
For example, factoring quadratics with leading coefficients greater than one.
This stuff is also really easy to relearn, provided you have a really strong grounding in reasoning. Math reasoning -- we'll call it the application of math processes to the world around us -- this is hard to teach.
This is what we would love students to retain, even if they don't go into mathematical fields.
This is also something that, the way we teach it in the U.S.
all but ensures they won't retain it.
So, I'd like to talk about why that is, why that's such a calamity for society, what we can do about it and, to close with, why this is an amazing time to be a math teacher.
So first, five symptoms that you're doing math reasoning wrong in your classroom.
One is a lack of initiative; your students don't self-start.
You finish your lecture block and immediately you have five hands going up asking you to re-explain the entire thing at their desks.
Students lack perseverance.
They lack retention; you find yourself re-explaining concepts three months later, wholesale.
There's an aversion to word problems, which describes 99 percent of my students.
And then the other one percent is eagerly looking for the formula to apply in that situation.
This is really destructive.
David Milch, creator of "Deadwood" and other amazing TV shows, has a really good description for this.
He swore off creating contemporary drama, shows set in the present day, because he saw that when people fill their mind with four hours a day of, for example, "Two and a Half Men," no disrespect, it shapes the neural pathways, he said, in such a way that they expect simple problems.
He called it, "an impatience with irresolution."
You're impatient with things that don't resolve quickly.
You expect sitcom-sized problems that wrap up in 22 minutes, three commercial breaks and a laugh track.
And I'll put it to all of you, what you already know, that no problem worth solving is that simple.
I am very concerned about this because I'm going to retire in a world that my students will run.
I'm doing bad things to my own future and well-being when I teach this way.
I'm here to tell you that the way our textbooks -- particularly mass-adopted textbooks -- teach math reasoning and patient problem solving, it's functionally equivalent to turning on "Two and a Half Men" and calling it a day.
(Laughter) In all seriousness. Here's an example from a physics textbook.
It applies equally to math.
Notice, first of all here, that you have exactly three pieces of information there, each of which will figure into a formula somewhere, eventually, which the student will then compute.
I believe in real life.
And ask yourself, what problem have you solved, ever, that was worth solving where you knew all of the given information in advance; where you didn't have a surplus of information and you had to filter it out, or you didn't have sufficient information and had to go find some.
I'm sure we all agree that no problem worth solving is like that.
And the textbook, I think, knows how it's hamstringing students because, watch this, this is the practice problem set.
When it comes time to do the actual problem set, we have problems like this right here where we're just swapping out numbers and tweaking the context a little bit.
And if the student still doesn't recognize the stamp this was molded from, it helpfully explains to you what sample problem you can return to to find the formula.
You could literally, I mean this, pass this particular unit without knowing any physics, just knowing how to decode a textbook. That's a shame.
So I can diagnose the problem a little more specifically in math.
Here's a really cool problem. I like this.
It's about defining steepness and slope using a ski lift.
But what you have here is actually four separate layers, and I'm curious which of you can see the four separate layers and, particularly, how when they're compressed together and presented to the student all at once, how that creates this impatient problem solving.
I'll define them here: You have the visual.
You also have the mathematical structure, talking about grids, measurements, labels, points, axes, that sort of thing.
You have substeps, which all lead to what we really want to talk about: which section is the steepest.
So I hope you can see.
I really hope you can see how what we're doing here is taking a compelling question, a compelling answer, but we're paving a smooth, straight path from one to the other and congratulating our students for how well they can step over the small cracks in the way.
That's all we're doing here.
So I want to put to you that if we can separate these in a different way and build them up with students, we can have everything we're looking for in terms of patient problem solving.
So right here I start with the visual, and I immediately ask the question: Which section is the steepest?
And this starts conversation because the visual is created in such a way where you can defend two answers.
So you get people arguing against each other, friend versus friend, in pairs, journaling, whatever.
And then eventually we realize it's getting annoying to talk about the skier in the lower left-hand side of the screen or the skier just above the mid line.
And we realize how great would it be if we just had some A, B, C and D labels to talk about them more easily.
And then as we start to define what does steepness mean, we realize it would be nice to have some measurements to really narrow it down, specifically what that means.
And then and only then, we throw down that mathematical structure.
The math serves the conversation, the conversation doesn't serve the math.
And at that point, I'll put it to you that nine out of 10 classes are good to go on the whole slope, steepness thing.
But if you need to, your students can then develop those substeps together.
Do you guys see how this, right here, compared to that -- which one creates that patient problem solving, that math reasoning?
It's been obvious in my practice, to me.
And I'll yield the floor here for a second to Einstein, who, I believe, has paid his dues.
He talked about the formulation of a problem being so incredibly important, and yet in my practice, in the U.S. here, we just give problems to students; we don't involve them in the formulation of the problem.
So 90 percent of what I do with my five hours of prep time per week is to take fairly compelling elements of problems like this from my textbook and rebuild them in a way that supports math reasoning and patient problem solving.
And here's how it works.
I like this question. It's about a water tank.
The question is: How long will it take you to fill it up?
First things first, we eliminate all the substeps.
Students have to develop those, they have to formulate those.
And then notice that all the information written on there is stuff you'll need.
None of it's a distractor, so we lose that.
Students need to decide, "All right, well, does the height matter? Does the side of it matter?
Does the color of the valve matter? What matters here?"
Such an underrepresented question in math curriculum.
So now we have a water tank.
How long will it take you to fill it up? And that's it.
And because this is the 21st century and we would love to talk about the real world on its own terms, not in terms of line art or clip art that you so often see in textbooks, we go out and we take a picture of it.
So now we have the real deal.
How long will it take it to fill it up?
And then even better is we take a video, a video of someone filling it up.
And it's filling up slowly, agonizingly slowly.
It's tedious.
Students are looking at their watches, rolling their eyes, and they're all wondering at some point or another, "Man, how long is it going to take to fill up?"
(Laughter) That's how you know you've baited the hook, right?
And that question, off this right here, is really fun for me because, like the intro, I teach kids -- because of my inexperience -- I teach the kids that are the most remedial, all right?
And I've got kids who will not join a conversation about math because someone else has the formula; someone else knows how to work the formula better than me, so I won't talk about it.
But here, every student is on a level playing field of intuition.
Everyone's filled something up with water before, so I get kids answering the question, "How long will it take?"
I've got kids who are mathematically and conversationally intimidated joining the conversation.
We put names on the board, attach them to guesses, and kids have bought in here.
And then we follow the process I've described.
And the best part here, or one of the better parts is that we don't get our answer from the answer key in the back of the teacher's edition.
We, instead, just watch the end of the movie.
(Laughter) And that's terrifying, because the theoretical models that always work out in the answer key in the back of a teacher's edition, that's great, but it's scary to talk about sources of error when the theoretical does not match up with the practical.
But those conversations have been so valuable, among the most valuable.
So I'm here to report some really fun games with students who come pre-installed with these viruses day one of the class.
These are the kids who now, one semester in, I can put something on the board, totally new, totally foreign, and they'll have a conversation about it for three or four minutes more than they would have at the start of the year, which is just so fun.
We're no longer averse to word problems, because we've redefined what a word problem is.
We're no longer intimidated by math, because we're slowly redefining what math is.
This has been a lot of fun.
I encourage math teachers I talk to to use multimedia, because it brings the real world into your classroom in high resolution and full color; to encourage student intuition for that level playing field; to ask the shortest question you possibly can and let those more specific questions come out in conversation; to let students build the problem, because Einstein said so; and to finally, in total, just be less helpful, because the textbook is helping you in all the wrong ways: It's buying you out of your obligation, for patient problem solving and math reasoning, to be less helpful.
And why this is an amazing time to be a math teacher right now is because we have the tools to create this high-quality curriculum in our front pocket.
It's ubiquitous and fairly cheap, and the tools to distribute it freely under open licenses has also never been cheaper or more ubiquitous.
I put a video series on my blog not so long ago and it got 6,000 views in two weeks.
I get emails still from teachers in countries I've never visited saying, "Wow, yeah. We had a good conversation about that.
Oh, and by the way, here's how I made your stuff better," which, wow.
I put this problem on my blog recently: In a grocery store, which line do you get into, the one that has one cart and 19 items or the line with four carts and three, five, two and one items.
And the linear modeling involved in that was some good stuff for my classroom, but it eventually got me on "Good Morning America" a few weeks later, which is just bizarre, right?
And from all of this, I can only conclude that people, not just students, are really hungry for this.
Math makes sense of the world.
Math is the vocabulary for your own intuition.
So I just really encourage you, whatever your stake is in education -- whether you're a student, parent, teacher, policy maker, whatever -- insist on better math curriculum.
We need more patient problem solvers. Thank you. (Applause)
I have a daughter, Mulan.
And when she was eight, last year, she was doing a report for school or she had some homework about frogs.
And we were at this restaurant, and she said, "So, basically, frogs lay eggs and the eggs turn into tadpoles, and tadpoles turn into frogs."
And I said, "Yeah. You know, I'm not really up on my frog reproduction that much.
It's the females, I think, that lay the eggs, and then the males fertilize them.
And then they become tadpoles and frogs."
And she says, "What? Only the females have eggs?"
And I said, "Yeah."
And she goes, "And what's this fertilizing?"
So I kind of said, "Oh, it's this extra ingredient, you know, that you need to create a new frog from the mom and dad frog." (Laughter) And she said, "Oh, so is that true for humans too?"
And I thought, "Okay, here we go."
I didn't know it would happen so quick, at eight.
I was trying to remember all the guidebooks, and all I could remember was, "Only answer the question they're asking.
Don't give any more information." (Laughter) So I said, "Yes."
And she said, "And where do, um, where do human women, like, where do women lay their eggs?"
And I said, "Well, funny you should ask. (Laughter) We have evolved to have our own pond.
We have our very own pond inside our bodies.
And we lay our eggs there, we don't have to worry about other eggs or anything like that.
It's our own pond. And that's how it happens."
And she goes, "Then how do they get fertilized?"
And I said, "Well, Men, through their penis, they fertilize the eggs by the sperm coming out.
And you go through the woman's vagina."
And so we're just eating, and her jaw just drops, and she goes, "Mom!
Like, where you go to the bathroom?"
And I said, "I know.
I know."
(Laughter) That's how we evolved. It does seem odd.
It is a little bit like having a waste treatment plant right next to an amusement park ...
Bad zoning, but ..." (Laughter) She's like, "What?" And she goes, "But Mom, but men and women can't ever see each other naked, Mom.
So how could that ever happen?"
And then I go, "Well," and then I put my Margaret Mead hat on.
"Human males and females develop a special bond, and when they're much older, much, much older than you, and they have a very special feeling, then they can be naked together."
And she said, "Mom, have you done this before?"
And I said, "Yes."
And she said, "But Mom, you can't have kids."
Because she knows that I adopted her and that I can't have kids.
And I said, "Yes."
And she said, "Well, you don't have to do that again."
And I said, "..."
And then she said, "But how does it happen when a man and woman are together?
Like, how do they know that's the time?
Mom, does the man just say, 'Is now the time to take off my pants?'" (Laughter) And I said, "Yes."
(Laughter) "That is exactly right.
That's exactly how it happens."
So we're driving home and she's looking out the window, and she goes, "Mom. What if two just people saw each other on the street, like a man and a woman, they just started doing it. Would that ever happen?"
And I said, "Oh, no. Humans are so private.
Oh ..."
And then she goes, "What if there was like a party, and there was just like a whole bunch of girls and a whole bunch of boys, and there was a bunch of men and women and they just started doing it, Mom?
Would that ever happen?"
And I said, "Oh, no, no.
That's not how we do it."
Then we got home and we see the cat. And she goes, "Mom, how do cats do it?"
And I go, "Oh, it's the same. It's basically the same."
And then she got all caught up in the legs. "But how would the legs go, Mom?
I don't understand the legs."
She goes, "Mom, everyone can't do the splits."
And I go, "I know, but the legs ..."
and I'm probably like, "The legs get worked out."
And she goes, "But I just can't understand it."
So I go, "You know, why don't we go on the Internet, and maybe we can see ... like on Wikipedia." (Laughter) So we go online, and we put in "cats mating."
And, unfortunately, on YouTube, there's many cats mating videos.
And we watched them and I'm so thankful, because she's just like, "Wow! This is so amazing."
She goes, "What about dogs?"
So we put in dogs mating, and, you know, we're watching it, and she's totally absorbed.
And then she goes, "Mom, do you think they would have, on the Internet, any humans mating?"
(Laughter) And then I realized that I had taken my little eight year old's hand, and taken her right into Internet porn. (Laughter) And I looked into this trusting, loving face, and I said, "Oh, no.
That would never happen."
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you. I'm so happy to be here.
(Music) (Singing) I was walking down the line, trying to find some peace of mind.
Then I saw you.
You were takin' it slow and walkin' it one step at a time.
I said, "Listen, stranger, I'm feeling low now.
I don't know which way to go."
I said, "If you're lost now, maybe I could help you along and sing you a song, and move you on and on and on."
Singing down the line.
Where shall we go? Where shall we go?
She said, "I'm looking for a kind of shelter.
A place for me to call my own.
I've been walking all night long, but I don't know where to call my home."
"The only way to find that place is close to where my heart is.
I know I'm gonna get there, but I've got to keep on walking down the line."
Down the line.
Down the line.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) How's everybody feeling today? You feeling good?
(Cheers) Fantastic. Would everybody mind singing with me for just one second?
Could you sing something? Could you sing a D?
Sing "Ooh."
(Audience hums) Oh -- louder for me, louder for me.
(Singing) Oh.
Now, please, if you could sing, "Oh oh oh."
Audience: Oh oh oh.
Jacob Collier: Whoa oh oh.
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
JC: Sing, "Whoa oh."
Audience: Whoa oh.
JC: Oh oh oh.
Audience: Oh oh oh.
JC: Sing, "Whoa oh oh."
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
JC: Sing, "Whoa oh oh."
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
JC: Whoa oh oh.
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
JC: Sing, "Whoa oh oh."
Audience: Whoa oh oh.
Thank you so much. That's beautiful. Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
So do you feel that motion?
Do you feel yourself as part of that motion, things moving underneath the surface?
So the language of musical harmony is an absolutely extraordinary one.
It's a way of navigating one's emotional frameworks, but without the need to put things into words, and I think that, as with many other languages, it doesn't matter how much you know about a language.
It doesn't matter how many words you can say, how many phrases you know.
What matters is the emotional choices you make with this language.
So I encourage us to embrace this idea as a community, which is the thing which in time may grow us towards as opposed to away from our own humanity.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) (Music) (Singing) Take me anywhere you want to go.
You know that my love is strong.
In my hideaway.
Softly, like the calm that follows storms, Find what I've been searching for all along.
In my hideaway.
Even when I close my eyes, darling, if you've gone astray, I'm on my way to my hideaway.
Touch me like I've never loved before, in the place that I adore, in my hideaway.
I know whichever way the wind may blow, there will be a place for me to go in my hideaway.
My hideaway.
Sticks and stones I won't hide from you no more.
And in time I find what I've been searching for.
Heard your voice calling out to me.
I'm on my way to where I can be free.
And if she won't wait for me, do it right, don't look back, keep my heart on the future.
On the soles of my shoes all the places I've been that I've known since I knew her.
'Cause it's you, don't you know that you're making me guess that you're the one for me.
That it's you that I guess that I wanted to know all along.
Girl, it's you that I want, that makes me complete, cause you're the one for me.
It's thanks to you that I guess that I want you to know I belong.
One, two, three, four, five.
(Applause) Thank you so much. Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Thanks so much. Thank you guys.
Kelly Stoetzel: OK, Jacob. Wow.
OK, we have some questions. JC: OK.
KS: That was spectacular.
JC: Thank you, Kelly. Thank you.
KS: Those visualizations we just saw, those were happening in real time, yeah?
JC: Yeah, so everything visual takes cues from things which are audial, or something, if that's a word, and so everything is real time.
I cue the loops, I play the instruments and then the tree, for example, that you saw grow, grows in such a way that it takes low long notes and grows thick long branches, and it takes high, quiet notes, whatever, and then it grows thin, small branches.
And then my singing voice sort of blows wind against the tree.
KS: So you're 22 years old. JC: Yes, indeed.
Moderator: You played all of that by yourself.
How did you get started and how did this all evolve?
JC: I have this magical room in my house in North London, which is, like, over there.
(Cheers) Thank you. Represent North London.
And this room -- I mean, this is my family home.
I grew up in this room filled with musical instruments, but most importantly, I had a family who encouraged me to invest in my own imagination, and so things I created, things I built were good things to be building just because I was making them, and I think that's such an important idea.
But this room was my paradise, essentially, and when I came to tour my album, which is called "In My Room," I thought I'd try and tour the room on the road, and that's quite a strange idea, but it's something that I've been working on for a couple of years, and it's quite exciting to be inside the circle.
KS: So this is really like the setup in your room, here.
JC: It kind of is. It's similar to the room in the sense that I can generate things on the spot and I can be spontaneous, which is what I think both music and all of the best ideas are all about.
KS: So you won two Grammys for a record that you made in your room by yourself.
And how is that even possible? We couldn't have done that, that couldn't have happened five years ago even.
JC: It's a brand new world.
The power is now in the hands of the creator, as I'm sure you guys would agree, as opposed to the big record company executive or the big man or something like that.
It's somebody with a good idea.
Here I am at TED saying this to you guys who know this already, but it's somebody with a good idea who can sow that seed.
That's the person who carries the torch into the world.
And yeah, I made this album completely on my own and I didn't wait for somebody to say, "Hey Jacob, you should make an album on your own."
I just went ahead and made it and I didn't mind what people thought, and two Grammys is a massive bonus.
(Applause) KS: Thank you so much, Jacob. JC: Thanks, Kelly. Thanks so much.
(Applause)
Let's put the care back into health care.
I've been working in the healthcare sector for the last 15 years, and one of the things that drew me to this sector was my interest in the care component of our healthcare systems -- more specifically, to the invaluable role played by carers.
Now, how many of you in this room consider yourself a carer?
By this, I mean how many of you have cared for someone suffering from an illness, injury or disability?
Can you raise your hand if this is the case?
About half of the room.
I want to thank all of you who raised your hands for the time that you've spent as a carer.
What you do is extremely precious.
I am a former cared-for patient myself.
When I was a teenager, I suffered from Lyme disease and underwent 18 months of antibiotic treatment.
I was repeatedly misdiagnosed: bacterial meningitis, fibromyalgia, you name it.
They couldn't figure it out.
And if I'm standing here in front of you today, it's because I owe my life to the stubbornness and commitment of one carer.
He did everything he could for me -- driving long distances from one treatment center to another, searching for the best option, and above all, never giving up, despite the difficulties he encountered, including from a work and quality-of-life perspective.
That was my father.
I recovered, and this is largely thanks to his dedication.
This experience turned me into a patient advocate.
The closer I looked, the more I saw carers providing the same kind of support that my father provided to me, and playing a crucial role in the healthcare system.
I don't think it's an exaggeration to say that without informal carers like him, our health and social systems would crumble.
And yet, they're largely going unrecognized.
I am now a long-distance carer for my mother, who suffers from multiple chronic conditions.
I understand, now more than ever, the demands that caregivers face.
With aging populations, economic instability, healthcare system stress and increased incidents of long-term chronic care needs, the importance and demands on family caregivers are greater than ever.
Carers all over the world are sacrificing their own physical, financial and psychosocial well-being to provide care for their loved ones.
Carers have their own limits and needs, and in absence of adequate support, many could be stretched to the breaking point.
Once seen as a personal and private matter in family life, unpaid caregiving has formed the invisible backbone of our health and social systems all over the world.
Many of these carers are even in this room, as we have just seen.
Who are they, and how many are they?
What are the challenges that they are facing?
And, above all, how can we make sure that their value to patients, our healthcare system and society is recognized?
Anyone can be a carer, really: a 15-year-old girl caring for a parent with multiple sclerosis; a 40-year-old man juggling full-time work while caring for his family who lives far away; a 60-year-old man caring for his wife who has terminal cancer; or an 80-year-old woman caring for her husband who has Alzheimer's disease.
The things carers do for their patients are varied.
They provide personal care, like getting someone dressed, feeding them, helping them to the bathroom, helping them move about.
They also provide a significant level of medical care, because they often know a lot about their loved one's condition and needs, sometimes better than the patients themselves, who may be paralyzed or confused by their diagnosis.
In those situations, carers are also advocates for the patient.
Also of critical importance is the fact that carers also provide emotional support.
They organize doctor's appointments, they manage finances, and they also deal with daily household tasks.
These challenges are challenges that we can't ignore.
There are currently more than 100 million carers providing 80 percent of care across Europe.
And even if these numbers are impressive, they're most likely underestimated, given the lack of recognition of carers.
As we have just seen, many of you in this room weren't sure if you could be qualified or considered to be a carer.
Many of you probably thought I was referring to a nurse or some other healthcare professional.
Also stunning are the benefits that carers bring to our societies.
I want to give you just one example from Australia in 2015.
The annual value provided by informal carers to those suffering from mental illness was evaluated at 13.2 billion Australian dollars.
This is nearly two times what the Australian government spends on mental health services annually.
These numbers, among others, demonstrate that if carers were to stop caring tomorrow, our health and social systems would crumble.
And while the importance of these millions of silent carers cannot be denied, they've largely been unnoticed by governments, healthcare systems and private entities.
In addition, carers are facing enormous personal challenges.
Many carers face higher costs and can face financial difficulties, given the fact that they may not be able to work full time or they may not be able to hold down a job altogether.
Many studies have shown that often carers sacrifice their own health and well-being in order to care for their loved ones.
Many carers spend so much time caring for their loved ones that often their family and their relationships can suffer.
Many carers report that often, their employers don't have adequate policies in place to support them.
There has been improvement, though, in the recognition of carers around the world.
Just a few years ago, an umbrella organization called the International Alliance of Carer Organizations, or IACO, was formed to bring together carer groups from all over the world, to provide strategic direction, facilitate information sharing, as well as actively advocate for carers on an international level.
Private entities are also starting to recognize the situation of carers.
I am proud that my personal engagement and enthusiasm towards this topic of carers found an echo in my own workplace.
My company is committed to this cause and has developed an unprecedented framework for its employees and society as a whole.
The objective is to empower carers to improve their own health and well-being and bring about a greater balance to their lives.
Nevertheless, much more needs to be done to complement these relatively isolated initiatives.
Our societies are facing increased health pressures, including aging populations, increased incidence of cancer and chronic conditions, widespread inequality, amongst many others.
To confront these challenges, policymakers must look beyond traditional healthcare pathways and employment policies and recognize that informal care will continue to form the bedrock of care.
Caring for someone should be a choice and should be done without putting one's own well-being in the balance.
But to really put the care back into health care, what's needed is a deep, societal, structural change.
And this can only happen through a change in mindset.
And this can start today.
Today, we can plant the seed for a change for millions of carers around the world.
Here's what I want to suggest: when you go home today or to the office tomorrow morning, embrace a carer.
Thank them, offer him or her a bit of help, maybe even volunteer as a carer yourself for a couple hours a week.
If carers around the world felt better recognized, it would not only improve their own health and well-being and sense of fulfillment, but it would also improve the lives of those that they're caring for.
Let's care more.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Good afternoon.
There's a medical revolution happening all around us, and it's one that's going to help us conquer some of society's most dreaded conditions, including cancer.
The revolution is called angiogenesis, and it's based on the process that our bodies use to grow blood vessels.
So why should we care about blood vessels?
Well, the human body is literally packed with them -- 60,000 miles worth in a typical adult.
End to end, that would form a line that would circle the earth twice.
The smallest blood vessels are called capillaries.
We've got 19 billion of them in our bodies.
And these are the vessels of life, and as I'll show you, they can also be the vessels of death.
Now, the remarkable thing about blood vessels is that they have this ability to adapt to whatever environment they're growing in.
For example, in the liver, they form channels to detoxify the blood; in the lungs, they line air sacs for gas exchange.
In muscle, they corkscrew, so that muscles can contract without cutting off circulation.
And in nerves, they course along like power lines, keeping those nerves alive.
We get most of these blood vessels when we're actually still in the womb.
And what that means is that as adults, blood vessels don't normally grow.
Except in a few special circumstances.
In women, blood vessels grow every month, to build the lining of the uterus.
During pregnancy, they form the placenta, which connects mom and baby.
And after injury, blood vessels actually have to grow under the scab in order to heal a wound.
And this is actually what it looks like, hundreds of blood vessels, all growing toward the center of the wound.
So the body has the ability to regulate the amount of blood vessels that are present at any given time.
It does this through an elaborate and elegant system of checks and balances, stimulators and inhibitors of angiogenesis, such that, when we need a brief burst of blood vessels, the body can do this by releasing stimulators, proteins called angiogenic factors, that act as natural fertilizer, and stimulate new blood vessels to sprout.
When those excess vessels are no longer needed, the body prunes them back to baseline, using naturally-occurring inhibitors of angiogenesis.
There are other situations where we start beneath the baseline, and we need to grow more blood vessels, just to get back to normal levels -- for example, after an injury -- and the body can do that too, but only to that normal level, that set point.
But what we now know, is that for a number of diseases, there are defects in the system, where the body can't prune back extra blood vessels, or can't grow enough new ones in the right place at the right time.
And in these situations, angiogenesis is out of balance.
And when angiogenesis is out of balance, a myriad of diseases result.
For example, insufficient angiogenesis -- not enough blood vessels -- leads to wounds that don't heal, heart attacks, legs without circulation, death from stroke, nerve damage.
And on the other end, excessive angiogenesis -- too many blood vessels -- drives disease, and we see this in cancer, blindness, arthritis, obesity, Alzheimer's disease.
In total, there are more than 70 major diseases affecting more than a billion people worldwide, that all look on the surface to be different from one another, but all actually share abnormal angiogenesis as their common denominator.
And this realization is allowing us to re-conceptualize the way that we actually approach these diseases, by controlling angiogenesis.
Now, I'm going to focus on cancer, because angiogenesis is a hallmark of cancer -- every type of cancer.
So here we go.
This is a tumor: dark, gray, ominous mass growing inside a brain.
And under the microscope, you can see hundreds of these brown-stained blood vessels, capillaries that are feeding cancer cells, bringing oxygen and nutrients.
But cancers don't start out like this, and in fact, cancers don't start out with a blood supply.
They start out as small, microscopic nests of cells, that can only grow to one half a cubic millimeter in size.
That's the tip of a ballpoint pen.
Then they can't get any larger because they don't have a blood supply, so they don't have enough oxygen or nutrients.
In fact, we're probably forming these microscopic cancers all the time in our body.
Autopsy studies from people who died in car accidents have shown that about 40 percent of women between the ages of 40 and 50 actually have microscopic cancers in their breasts.
About 50 percent of men in their 50s and 60s have microscopic prostate cancers, and virtually 100 percent of us, by the time we reach our 70s, will have microscopic cancers growing in our thyroid.
Yet, without a blood supply, most of these cancers will never become dangerous.
Dr. Judah Folkman, who was my mentor and who was the pioneer of the angiogenesis field, once called this "cancer without disease."
So the body's ability to balance angiogenesis, when it's working properly, prevents blood vessels from feeding cancers.
And this turns out to be one of our most important defense mechanisms against cancer.
In fact, if you actually block angiogenesis and prevent blood vessels from ever reaching cancer cells, tumors simply can't grow up.
But once angiogenesis occurs, cancers can grow exponentially.
And this is actually how a cancer goes from being harmless, to being deadly.
Cancer cells mutate, and they gain the ability to release lots of those angiogenic factors, natural fertilizer, that tip the balance in favor of blood vessels invading the cancer.
And once those vessels invade the cancer, it can expand, it can invade local tissues, and the same vessels that are feeding tumors allow cancer cells to exit into the circulation as metastases.
And unfortunately, this late stage of cancer is the one at which it's most likely to be diagnosed, when angiogenesis is already turned on, and cancer cells are growing like wild.
So, if angiogenesis is a tipping point between a harmless cancer and a harmful one, then one major part of the angiogenesis revolution is a new approach to treating cancer by cutting off the blood supply.
We call this antiangiogenic therapy, and it's completely different from chemotherapy, because it selectively aims at the blood vessels that are feeding the cancers.
We can do this because tumor blood vessels are unlike normal, healthy vessels we see in other places of the body -- they're abnormal, they're very poorly constructed, and because of that, they're highly vulnerable to treatments that target them.
In effect, when we give cancer patients antiangiogenic therapy -- here, an experimental drug for a glioma, which is a type of brain tumor -- you can see that there are dramatic changes that occur when the tumor is being starved.
Here's a woman with a breast cancer, being treated with the antiangiogenic drug called Avastin, which is FDA approved.
And you can see that the halo of blood flow disappears after treatment.
Well, I've just shown you two very different types of cancer that both responded to antiangiogenic therapy.
So a few years ago, I asked myself, "Can we take this one step further and treat other cancers, even in other species?"
So here is a nine year-old boxer named Milo, who had a very aggressive tumor called a malignant neurofibroma growing on his shoulder.
It invaded into his lungs.
His veterinarian only gave him three months to live.
So we created a cocktail of antiangiogenic drugs that could be mixed into his dog food, as well as an antiangiogenic cream, that could be applied on the surface of the tumor.
And within a few weeks of treatment, we were able to slow down that cancer's growth, such that we were ultimately able to extend Milos survival to six times what the veterinarian had initially predicted, all with a very good quality of life.
And we've subsequently treated more than 600 dogs.
We have about a 60 percent response rate, and improved survival for these pets that were about to be euthanized.
So let me show you a couple of even more interesting examples.
This is 20-year-old dolphin living in Florida, and she had these lesions in her mouth that, over the course of three years, developed into invasive squamous cell cancers.
So we created an antiangiogenic paste.
We had it painted on top of the cancer three times a week.
And over the course of seven months, the cancers completely disappeared, and the biopsies came back as normal.
Here's a cancer growing on the lip of a Quarter Horse named Guinness.
It's a very, very deadly type of cancer called an angiosarcoma.
It had already spread to his lymph nodes, so we used an antiangiogenic skin cream for the lip, and the oral cocktail, so we could treat from the inside as well as the outside.
And over the course of six months, he experienced a complete remission.
And here he is six years later, Guinness, with his very happy owner.
(Applause) Now obviously, antiangiogenic therapy could be used for a wide range of cancers.
And in fact, the first pioneering treatments for people as well as dogs, are already becoming available.
There are 12 different drugs, 11 different cancer types.
But the real question is: How well do these work in practice?
So here's actually the patient survival data from eight different types of cancer.
The bars represent survival time taken from the era in which there was only chemotherapy, or surgery, or radiation available.
But starting in 2004, when antiangiogenic therapies first became available, you can see that there has been a 70 to 100 percent improvement in survival for people with kidney cancer, multiple myeloma, colorectal cancer, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
That's impressive.
But for other tumors and cancer types, the improvements have only been modest.
So I started asking myself, "Why haven't we been able to do better?"
And the answer, to me, is obvious: we're treating cancer too late in the game, when it's already established, and oftentimes, it's already spread or metastasized.
And as a doctor, I know that once a disease progresses to an advanced stage, achieving a cure can be difficult, if not impossible.
So I went back to the biology of angiogenesis, and started thinking: Could the answer to cancer be preventing angiogenesis, beating cancer at its own game, so the cancers could never become dangerous?
This could help healthy people, as well as people who've already beaten cancer once or twice, and want to find a way to keep it from coming back.
So to look for a way to prevent angiogenesis in cancer, I went back to look at cancer's causes.
And what really intrigued me, was when I saw that diet accounts for 30 to 35 percent of environmentally-caused cancers.
Now the obvious thing is to think about what we could remove from our diet, what to strip out, take away.
But I actually took a completely opposite approach, and began asking: What could we be adding to our diet that's naturally antiangiogenic, and that could boost the body's defense system, and beat back those blood vessels that are feeding cancers?
In other words, can we eat to starve cancer?
(Laughter) Well, the answer is yes, and I'm going to show you how.
And our search for this has taken us to the market, the farm and to the spice cabinet, because what we've discovered is that Mother Nature has laced a large number of foods and beverages and herbs with naturally-occurring inhibitors of angiogenesis.
Here's a test system we developed.
At the center is a ring from which hundreds of blood vessels are growing out in a starburst fashion.
And we can use this system to test dietary factors at concentrations that are obtainable by eating.
Let me show you what happens when we put in an extract from red grapes.
The active ingredient is resveratrol, it's also found in red wine.
This inhibits abnormal angiogenesis, by 60 percent.
Here's what happens when we added an extract from strawberries.
It potently inhibits angiogenesis.
And extract from soybeans.
And here is a growing list of antiangiogenic foods and beverages that we're interested in studying.
For each food type, we believe that there are different potencies within different strains and varietals.
And we want to measure this because, well, while you're eating a strawberry or drinking tea, why not select the one that's most potent for preventing cancer?
So here are four different teas that we've tested.
They're all common ones: Chinese jasmine, Japanese sencha, Earl Grey and a special blend that we prepared, and you can see clearly that the teas vary in their potency, from less potent to more potent.
But what's very cool is when we combine the two less potent teas together, the combination, the blend, is more potent than either one alone.
This means there's food synergy.
Here's some more data from our testing.
Now in the lab, we can simulate tumor angiogenesis, represented here in a black bar.
And using this system, we can test the potency of cancer drugs.
So the shorter the bar, the less angiogenesis -- that's good.
And here are some common drugs that have been associated with reducing the risk of cancer in people.
Statins, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and a few others -- they inhibit angiogenesis, too.
And here are the dietary factors going head-to-head against these drugs.
You can see they clearly hold their own, and in some cases, they're more potent than the actual drugs.
Soy, parsley, garlic, grapes, berries.
I could go home and cook a tasty meal using these ingredients.
Imagine if we could create the world's first rating system, in which we could score foods according to their antiangiogenic, cancer-preventative properties.
And that's what we're doing right now.
Now, I've shown you a bunch of lab data, and so the real question is: What is the evidence in people that eating certain foods can reduce angiogenesis in cancer?
Well, the best example I know is a study of 79,000 men followed over 20 years, in which it was found that men who consumed cooked tomatoes two to three times a week, had up to a 50 percent reduction in their risk of developing prostate cancer.
Now, we know that tomatoes are a good source of lycopene, and lycopene is antiangiogenic.
But what's even more interesting from this study, is that in those men who did develop prostate cancer, those who ate more servings of tomato sauce, actually had fewer blood vessels feeding their cancer.
So this human study is a prime example of how antiangiogenic substances present in food and consumed at practical levels, can have an impact on cancer.
And we're now studying the role of a healthy diet -- with Dean Ornish at UCSF and Tufts University -- the role of this healthy diet on markers of angiogenesis that we can find in the bloodstream.
Obviously, what I've shared with you has some far-ranging implications, even beyond cancer research.
Because if we're right, it could impact consumer education, food services, public health and even the insurance industry.
And in fact, some insurance companies are already beginning to think along these lines.
Check out this ad from BlueCross BlueShield of Minnesota.
For many people around the world, dietary cancer prevention may be the only practical solution, because not everybody can afford expensive end-stage cancer treatments, but everybody could benefit from a healthy diet based on local, sustainable, antiangiogenic crops.
Now, finally, I've talked to you about food, and I've talked to you about cancer, so there's just one more disease that I have to tell you about, and that's obesity.
Because it turns out that adipose tissue -- fat -- is highly angiogenesis-dependent.
And like a tumor, fat grows when blood vessels grow.
So the question is: Can we shrink fat by cutting off its blood supply?
The top curve shows the body weight of a genetically obese mouse that eats nonstop until it turns fat, like this furry tennis ball.
(Laughter) And the bottom curve is the weight of a normal mouse.
If you take the obese mouse and give it an angiogenesis inhibitor, it loses weight.
Stop the treatment, gains the weight back. Restart the treatment, loses the weight.
Stop the treatment, it gains the weight back.
And, in fact, you can cycle the weight up and down simply by inhibiting angiogenesis.
So this approach that we're taking for cancer prevention may also have an application for obesity.
The truly interesting thing about this is that we can't take these obese mice and make them lose more weight than what the normal mouse's weight is supposed to be.
In other words, we can't create supermodel mice.
(Laughter) And this speaks to the role of angiogenesis in regulating healthy set points.
Albert Szent-Gyrgi once said, "Discovery consists of seeing what everyone has seen, and thinking what no one has thought."
I hope I've convinced you that for diseases like cancer, obesity and other conditions, there may be a great power in attacking their common denominator: angiogenesis.
And that's what I think the world needs now.
Thank you.
(Applause) June Cohen: I have a quick question for you.
JC: So these drugs aren't exactly in mainstream cancer treatments right now.
For anyone out here who has cancer, what would you recommend?
Do you recommend pursuing these treatments now, for most cancer patients?
William Li: There are antiangiogenic treatments that are FDA approved, and if you're a cancer patient, or working for one or advocating for one, you should ask about them.
And there are many clinical trials.
The Angiogenesis Foundation is following almost 300 companies, and there are about 100 more drugs in that pipeline.
So, consider the approved ones, look for clinical trials, but then between what the doctor can do for you, we need to start asking what can we do for ourselves.
This is one of the themes I'm talking about: We can empower ourselves to do the things that doctors can't do for us, which is to use knowledge and take action.
And if Mother Nature has given us some clues, we think there might be a new future in the value of how we eat, and what we eat is really our chemotherapy three times a day.
JC: Right. And along those lines, for people who might have risk factors for cancer, would you recommend pursuing any treatments prophylactically, or simply pursuing the right diet, with lots of tomato sauce?
WL: Well, you know, there's abundant epidemiological evidence, and I think in the information age, it doesn't take long to go to a credible source like PubMed, the National Library of Medicine, to look for epidemiological studies for cancer risk reduction based on diet and based on common medications.
And that's certainly something that anybody can look into.
JC: Okay. Well, thank you so much.
(Applause)
On September 10, the morning of my seventh birthday, I came downstairs to the kitchen, where my mother was washing the dishes and my father was reading the paper or something, and I sort of presented myself to them in the doorway, and they said, "Hey, happy birthday!" And I said, "I'm seven."
And my father smiled and said, "Well, you know what that means, don't you?"
And I said, "Yeah, that I'm going to have a party and a cake and get a lot of presents?"
But more importantly, being seven means that you've reached the age of reason, and you're now capable of committing any and all sins against God and man."
(Laughter) Now, I had heard this phrase, "age of reason," before.
Sister Mary Kevin had been bandying it about my second-grade class at school.
But when she said it, the phrase seemed all caught up in the excitement of preparations for our first communion and our first confession, and everybody knew that was really all about the white dress and the white veil.
And anyway, I hadn't really paid all that much attention to that phrase, "age of reason."
So, I said, "Yeah, yeah, age of reason. What does that mean again?"
And my dad said, "Well, we believe, in the Catholic Church, that God knows that little kids don't know the difference between right and wrong, but when you're seven, you're old enough to know better.
So, you've grown up and reached the age of reason, and now God will start keeping notes on you, and begin your permanent record."
(Laughter) And I said, "Oh ...
You mean all that time, up till today, all that time I was so good, God didn't notice it?"
And my mom said, "Well, I noticed it."
(Laughter) And I thought, "How could I not have known this before?
How could it not have sunk in when they'd been telling me?
And worst of all, how could I not have realized this very important information until the very day that it was basically useless to me?"
So I said, "Well, Mom and Dad, what about Santa Claus?
I mean, Santa Claus knows if you're naughty or nice, right?"
And my dad said, "Yeah, but, honey, I think that's technically just between Thanksgiving and Christmas."
And my mother said, "Oh, Bob, stop it. Let's just tell her. I mean, she's seven.
Julie, there is no Santa Claus."
(Laughter) Now, this was actually not that upsetting to me.
My parents had this whole elaborate story about Santa Claus: how they had talked to Santa Claus himself and agreed that instead of Santa delivering our presents over the night of Christmas Eve, like he did for every other family who got to open their surprises first thing Christmas morning, our family would give Santa more time.
Santa would come to our house while we were at nine o'clock high mass on Christmas morning, but only if all of us kids did not make a fuss.
Which made me very suspicious.
It was pretty obvious that it was really our parents giving us the presents.
I mean, my dad had a very distinctive wrapping style, and my mother's handwriting was so close to Santa's.
(Laughter) Plus, why would Santa save time by having to loop back to our house after he'd gone to everybody else's?
There was only one obvious conclusion to reach from this mountain of evidence: our family was too strange and weird for even Santa Claus to come visit, and my poor parents were trying to protect us from the embarrassment, this humiliation of rejection by Santa, who was jolly -- but let's face it, he was also very judgmental.
So to find out that there was no Santa Claus at all was actually sort of a relief.
I left the kitchen not really in shock about Santa, but rather, I was just dumbfounded about how I could have missed this whole age of reason thing.
It was too late for me, but maybe I could help someone else, someone who could use the information.
They had to fit two criteria: they had to be old enough to be able to understand the whole concept of the age of reason, and not yet seven.
The answer was clear: my brother Bill. He was six.
Well, I finally found Bill about a block away from our house at this public school playground.
It was a Saturday, and he was all by himself, just kicking a ball against the side of a wall.
I ran up to him and said, "Bill!
I just realized that the age of reason starts when you turn seven, and then you're capable of committing any and all sins against God and man."
And I said, "So, you're six.
You have a whole year to do anything you want to and God won't notice it."
And I said, "So? So everything!"
But when I got to the top of the steps, I turned around dramatically and said, "Oh, by the way, Bill -- there is no Santa Claus."
(Laughter) Now, I didn't know it at the time, but I really wasn't turning seven on September 10th.
For my 13th birthday, I planned a slumber party with all of my girlfriends, but a couple of weeks beforehand my mother took me aside and said, "I need to speak to you privately.
September 10th is not your birthday. It's October 10th."
(Laughter) And she said ...
(Laughter) "So I told them that your birthday was September 10th, and then I wasn't sure that you weren't just going to go blab it all over the place, so I started to tell you your birthday was September 10th.
But, Julie, you were so ready to start school, honey. You were so ready."
I thought about it, and when I was four, I was already the oldest of four children, and my mother even had another child to come, so what I think she -- understandably -- really meant was that she was so ready, she was so ready.
Then she said, "Don't worry, Julie.
Every year on October 10th, when it was your birthday but you didn't realize it, I made sure that you ate a piece of cake that day."
(Laughter) Which was comforting, but troubling.
My mother had been celebrating my birthday with me, without me.
(Laughter) What was so upsetting about this new piece of information was not that I had to change the date of my slumber party with all of my girlfriends.
What was most upsetting was that this meant I was not a Virgo.
I had a huge Virgo poster in my bedroom.
And I read my horoscope every single day, and it was so totally me.
(Laughter) And this meant that I was a Libra?
So, I took the bus downtown to get the new Libra poster.
The Virgo poster is a picture of a beautiful woman with long hair, sort of lounging by some water, but the Libra poster is just a huge scale.
This was around the time that I started filling out physically, and I was filling out a lot more than a lot of the other girls, and frankly, the whole idea that my astrological sign was a scale just seemed ominous and depressing.
(Laughter) But I got the new Libra poster, and I started to read my new Libra horoscope, and I was astonished to find that it was also totally me.
(Laughter) It wasn't until years later, looking back on this whole age-of-reason, change-of-birthday thing, that it dawned on me: I wasn't turning seven when I thought I turned seven.
I had a whole other month to do anything I wanted to before God started keeping tabs on me.
Oh, life can be so cruel.
One day, two Mormon missionaries came to my door.
Now, I just live off a main thoroughfare in Los Angeles, and my block is -- well, it's a natural beginning for people who are peddling things door to door.
Sometimes I get little old ladies from the Seventh Day Adventist Church showing me these cartoon pictures of heaven.
And sometimes I get teenagers who promise me that they won't join a gang and just start robbing people, if I only buy some magazine subscriptions from them.
So normally, I just ignore the doorbell, but on this day, I answered.
And there stood two boys, each about 19, in white, starched short-sleeved shirts, and they had little name tags that identified them as official representatives of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and they said they had a message for me, from God.
I said, "A message for me? From God?" And they said, "Yes."
Now, I was raised in the Pacific Northwest, around a lot of Church of Latter-day Saints people and, you know, I've worked with them and even dated them, but I never really knew the doctrine, or what they said to people when they were out on a mission, and I guess I was sort of curious, so I said, "Well, please, come in."
And they looked really happy, because I don't think this happens to them all that often.
(Laughter) And I sat them down, and I got them glasses of water -- Ok, I got it, I got it.
Don't touch my hair, that's the thing.
(Laughter) You can't put a video of myself in front of me and expect me not to fix my hair.
Ok.
(Laughter) So I sat them down and I got them glasses of water, and after niceties, they said, "Do you believe that God loves you with all his heart?"
And I thought, "Well, of course I believe in God, but you know, I don't like that word 'heart,' because it anthropomorphizes God, and I don't like the word, 'his,' either, because that sexualizes God."
But I didn't want to argue semantics with these boys, so after a very long, uncomfortable pause, I said, "Yes, yes, I do. I feel very loved."
And they looked at each other and smiled, like that was the right answer.
And then they said, "Do you believe that we're all brothers and sisters on this planet?"
And I was so relieved that it was a question I could answer so quickly.
And they said, "Well, then we have a story to tell you."
And they told me this story all about this guy named Lehi, who lived in Jerusalem in 600 BC.
Now, apparently in Jerusalem in 600 BC, everyone was completely bad and evil.
Every single one of them: man, woman, child, infant, fetus.
And God came to Lehi and said to him, "Put your family on a boat and I will lead you out of here."
He led them to America.
I said, "America?
And they said, "Yes."
(Laughter) Then they told me how Lehi and his descendants reproduced and reproduced, and over the course of 600 years, there were two great races of them, the Nephites and the Lamanites, and the Nephites were totally good -- each and every one of them -- and the Lamanites were totally bad and evil -- every single one of them just bad to the bone.
Then, after Jesus died on the cross for our sins, on his way up to heaven, he stopped by America and visited the Nephites.
(Laughter) And he told them that if they all remained totally, totally good -- each and every one of them -- they would win the war against the evil Lamanites.
But apparently somebody blew it, because the Lamanites were able to kill all the Nephites.
All but one guy, this guy named Mormon, who managed to survive by hiding in the woods.
And he made sure this whole story was written down in reformed Egyptian hieroglyphics chiseled onto gold plates, which he then buried near Palmyra, New York.
(Laughter) Well, I was just on the edge of my seat.
(Laughter) I said, "What happened to the Lamanites?"
And they said, "Well, they became our Native Americans, here in the U.S."
And I said, "So, you believe the Native Americans are descended from a people who were totally evil?"
Then they told me how this guy named Joseph Smith found those buried gold plates right in his backyard, and he also found this magic stone back there that he put into his hat and then buried his face into, and this allowed him to translate the gold plates from the reformed Egyptian into English.
Well, at this point I just wanted to give these two boys some advice about their pitch.
(Laughter) I wanted to say -- (Applause) "Ok, don't start with this story."
(Laughter) I mean, even the Scientologists know to start with a personality test before they start -- (Applause) telling people all about Xenu, the evil intergalactic overlord.
Then, they said, "Do you believe that God speaks to us through his righteous prophets?"
And I said, "No, I don't," because I was sort of upset about this Lamanite story and this crazy gold plate story, but the truth was, I hadn't really thought this through, so I backpedaled a little and I said, "Well, what exactly do you mean by 'righteous'?
And what do you mean by prophets? Like, could the prophets be women?"
And they said, "No." And I said, "Why?"
And they said, "Well, it's because God gave women a gift that is so spectacular, it is so wonderful, that the only gift he had left over to give men was the gift of prophecy."
What is this wonderful gift God gave women, I wondered?
Maybe their greater ability to cooperate and adapt?
(Laughter) Women's longer lifespan?
The fact that women tend to be much less violent than men?
They said, "Well, it's her ability to bear children."
I said, "Oh, come on.
I mean, even if women tried to have a baby every single year from the time they were 15 to the time they were 45, assuming they didn't die from exhaustion, it still seems like some women would have some time left over to hear the word of God."
(Laughter) Well, then they didn't look so fresh-faced and cute to me any more, but they had more to say.
They said, "Well, we also believe that if you're a Mormon, and if you're in good standing with the church, when you die, you get to go to heaven and be with your family for all eternity."
And I said, "Oh, dear.
(Laughter) That wouldn't be such a good incentive for me."
(Laughter) And they said, "Oh.
(Laughter) Hey! Well, we also believe that when you go to heaven, you get your body restored to you in its best original state.
Like, if you'd lost a leg, well, you get it back.
Or, if you'd gone blind, you could see."
I said, "Oh. Now, I don't have a uterus, because I had cancer a few years ago.
So does this mean that if I went to heaven, I would get my old uterus back?"
And I said, "I don't want it back. I'm happy without it." Gosh.
What if you had a nose job and you liked it?
(Laughter) Would God force you to get your old nose back?
Then they gave me this Book of Mormon, told me to read this chapter and that chapter, and said they'd come back and check in on me, and I think I said something like, "Please don't hurry," or maybe just, "Please don't," and they were gone.
Ok, so I initially felt really superior to these boys, and smug in my more conventional faith.
But then the more I thought about it, the more I had to be honest with myself.
If someone came to my door and I was hearing Catholic theology and dogma for the very first time, and they said, "We believe that God impregnated a very young girl without the use of intercourse, and the fact that she was a virgin is maniacally important to us."
(Laughter) "And she had a baby, and that's the son of God," I mean, I would think that's equally ridiculous.
I'm just so used to that story.
(Laughter) So, I couldn't let myself feel condescending towards these boys.
But the question they asked me when they first arrived really stuck in my head: Did I believe that God loved me with all his heart?
Because I wasn't exactly sure how I felt about that question.
Now, if they had asked me, "Do you feel that God loves you with all his heart?"
Well, that would have been much different, I think I would have instantly answered, "Yes, yes, I feel it all the time.
I feel God's love when I'm hurt and confused, and I feel consoled and cared for.
I take shelter in God's love when I don't understand why tragedy hits, and I feel God's love when I look with gratitude at all the beauty I see."
But since they asked me that question with the word "believe" in it, somehow it was all different, because I wasn't exactly sure if I believed what I so clearly felt.
About a year ago, I asked myself a question: "Knowing what I know, why am I not a vegetarian?"
After all, I'm one of the green guys: I grew up with hippie parents in a log cabin.
I started a site called TreeHugger -- I care about this stuff.
I knew that eating a mere hamburger a day can increase my risk of dying by a third.
Cruelty: I knew that the 10 billion animals we raise each year for meat are raised in factory farm conditions that we, hypocritically, wouldn't even consider for our own cats, dogs and other pets.
Environmentally, meat, amazingly, causes more emissions than all of transportation combined: cars, trains, planes, buses, boats, all of it.
And beef production uses 100 times the water that most vegetables do.
I also knew that I'm not alone.
We as a society are eating twice as much meat as we did in the 50s.
So what was once the special little side treat now is the main, much more regular.
So really, any of these angles should have been enough to convince me to go vegetarian.
Yet, there I was -- chk, chk, chk -- tucking into a big old steak.
So why was I stalling?
I realized that what I was being pitched was a binary solution.
It was either you're a meat eater or you're a vegetarian, and I guess I just wasn't quite ready.
Imagine your last hamburger.
(Laughter) So my common sense, my good intentions, were in conflict with my taste buds.
And I'd commit to doing it later, and not surprisingly, later never came.
Sound familiar?
So I wondered, might there be a third solution?
And I thought about it, and I came up with one.
I've been doing it for the last year, and it's great.
It's called weekday veg.
The name says it all: Nothing with a face Monday through Friday.
On the weekend, your choice.
Simple.
If you want to take it to the next level, remember, the major culprits in terms of environmental damage and health are red and processed meats.
So you want to swap those out with some good, sustainably harvested fish.
It's structured, so it ends up being simple to remember, and it's okay to break it here and there.
After all, cutting five days a week is cutting 70 percent of your meat intake.
The program has been great, weekday veg.
My footprint's smaller, I'm lessening pollution, I feel better about the animals, I'm even saving money.
Best of all, I'm healthier, I know that I'm going to live longer, and I've even lost a little weight.
So, please ask yourselves, for your health, for your pocketbook, for the environment, for the animals: What's stopping you from giving weekday veg a shot?
After all, if all of us ate half as much meat, it would be like half of us were vegetarians.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What images do we see from the rest of the world?
We see natural disasters, war, terror.
We see refugees, and we see horrible diseases.
Right?
We see beautiful beaches, cute animals, beautiful nature, cultural rites and stuff.
And then we're supposed to make the connection in our head and create a worldview out of this.
And how is that possible?
I mean, the world seems so strange.
And I don't think it is.
I don't think the world is that strange, actually.
I've got an idea.
So, imagine the world as a street, where the poorest live on one end and the richest on the other, and everyone in the world lives on this street.
You live there, I live there, and the neighbors we have are the ones with the same income.
People that live in the same block as me, they are from other countries, other cultures, other religions.
The street might look something like this.
And I was curious.
In Sweden where I live, I've been meeting quite a lot of students.
And I wanted to know, where would they think they belong on a street like this?
So we changed these houses into people.
This is the seven billion people that live in the world.
And just by living in Sweden, most likely you belong there, which is the richest group.
But the students, when you ask them, they think they are in the middle.
And how can you understand the world when you see all these scary images from the world, and you think you live in the middle, while you're actually atop?
Not very easy.
So I sent out photographers to 264 homes in 50 countries -- so far, still counting -- and in each home, the photographers take the same set of photos.
They take the bed, the stove, the toys and about 135 other things.
So we have 40,000 images or something at the moment, and it looks something like this.
Here we see, it says on the top, "Families in the world by income," and we have the street represented just beneath it, you can see.
And then we see some of the families we have visited.
We have the poorer to the left, the richer to the right, and everybody else in between, as the concept says.
We can go down and see the different families we have been to so far.
Here, for instance, we have a family in Zimbabwe, one in India, one in Russia, and one in Mexico, for instance.
So we can go around and look at the families this way.
But of course, we can choose if we want to see some certain countries and compare them, or regions, or if we want, to see other things.
So let's go to the front doors and see what they look like.
Go here, and this is the world by front doors, ordered by income.
And we can see the big difference from India, Philippines, China, Ukraine, in these examples, for instance.
What if we go into the home?
We can look at beds.
This is what beds can look like.
Doesn't look like the glossy magazines.
Doesn't look like the scary images in the media.
So remember that the students in Sweden, they thought they were in the middle of the world income.
So let's go there.
We zoom in here by filtering the street to the middle, like this, and then I ask the students: Is this what your bedroom looks like?
And they would actually not feel very at home.
So we go down and see, do they feel more at home here?
And they would say, no, this is not what a Swedish typical bedroom looks like.
We go up here, and suddenly, they feel sort of at home.
And we can see here in this image, we see bedrooms in China, Netherlands, South Korea, France and the United States, for instance.
So we can click here.
If we want to know more about the family, the home in which this bed stands, we can just click it and go to the family, and we can see all the images from that family.
We can go this way, too.
And of course, this is free for anyone to use.
So just go here, and please add more images, of course.
My personal favorite that everyone always tries to make me not show, I'm going to show you now, and that's toilets, because you're not really allowed to look at people's toilets, but now we can just do it, right?
So here (Laughter) we have a lot of toilets.
They look pretty much as we're used to, right?
And they are in China, Netherlands, United States, Nepal and so forth, Ukraine, France.
And they look pretty similar, right?
But remember, we are in the top.
So what about checking all the toilets?
Now it looks a bit different, doesn't it?
So this way we can visually browse through categories of imagery, using photos as data.
But not everything works as a photo.
Sometimes it's easier to understand what people do, so we also do video snippets of everyday activities, such as washing hands, doing laundry, brushing teeth, and so on.
And I'm going to show you a short snippet of tooth-brushing, and were going to start at the top.
So we see people brushing their teeth.
Pretty interesting to see the same type of plastic toothbrush is being used in all these places in the same way, right?
Some are more serious than others -- (Laughter) but still, the toothbrush is there.
And then, coming down to this poorer end, then we will see people start using sticks, and they will sometimes use their finger to brush their teeth.
So this particular woman in Malawi, when she brushes her teeth, she scrapes some mud off from her wall and she mixes it with water, and then she's brushing.
Therefore, in the Dollar Street material, we have tagged this image not only as her wall, which it is, but also as her toothpaste, because that is also what she uses it for.
So we can say, in the poorer end of the street, you will use a stick or your finger, you come to the middle, you will start using a toothbrush, and then you come up to the top, and you will start using one each.
Pretty nice, not sharing a toothbrush with your grandma.
And you can also look at some countries.
Here, we have the income distribution within the US, most people in the middle.
We have a family we visited in the richer end, the Howards.
We can see their home here.
And we also visited a family in the poorer end, down here.
And then what we can do now is we can do instant comparisons of things in their homes.
Let's look in their cutlery drawer.
So, observe the Hadleys: they have all their cutlery in a green plastic box.
and they have a few different types and some of them are plastic, while the Howards, they have this wooden drawer with small wooden compartments in it and a section for each type of cutlery.
We can add more families, and we can see kitchen sinks, or maybe living rooms.
Of course, we can do the same in other countries.
So we go to China, we pick three families.
we look at their houses, we can look at their sofas, we can look at their stoves.
And when you see these stoves, I think it's obvious that it's a stupid thing that usually, when we think about other countries, we think they have a certain way of doing things.
But look at these stoves.
Very different, right, because it depends on what income level you have, how you're going to cook your food.
But the cool thing is when we start comparing across countries.
So here we have China and the US.
See the big overlap between these two.
So we picked the two homes we have already seen in these countries, the Wus and the Howards.
Standing in their bedroom, pretty hard to tell which one is China and which one is the US, right?
Both have brown leather sofas, and they have similar play structures.
Most likely both are made in China, so, I mean, that's not very strange -- (Laughter) but that is similar.
We can of course go down to the other end of the street, adding Nigeria.
So let's compare two homes in China and Nigeria.
Looking at the family photos, they do not look like they have a lot in common, do they?
But start seeing their ceiling.
They have a plastic shield and grass.
They have the same kind of sofa, they store their grain in similar ways, they're going to have fish for dinner, and they're boiling their water in identical ways.
So if we would visit any of these homes, there's a huge risk that we would say we know anything about the specific way you do things in China or Nigeria, while, looking at this, it's quite obvious -- this is how you do things on this income level.
That is what you can see when you go through the imagery in Dollar Street.
So going back to the figures, the seven billion people of the world, now we're going to do a quick recap.
We're going to look at comparisons of things in the poorest group: beds, roofs, cooking.
And observe, in all these comparisons, their homes are chosen so they are in completely different places of the world.
But what we see is pretty identical.
So the poorest billion cooking would look somewhat the same in these two places; you might not have shoes; eating, if you don't have a spoon; storing salt would be similar whether you're in Asia or in Africa; and going to the toilet would be pretty much the same experience whether you're in Nigeria or Nepal.
In the middle, we have a huge group of five billion, but here we can see you will have electric light, most likely; you will no longer sleep on the floor; you will store your salt in a container; you will have more than one spoon; you will have more than one pen; the ceiling is no longer leaking that much; you will have shoes; you might have a phone, toys, and produce waste.
Coming to our group up here, similar shoes, Jordan, US.
We have sofas, fruits, hairbrushes, bookshelves, toilet paper in Tanzania, Palestine, hard to distinguish if we would sit in US, Palestine or Tanzania from this one.
Vietnam, Kenya: wardrobes, lamps, black dogs, floors, soap, laundry, clocks, computers, phones, and so on, right?
So we have a lot of similarities all over the world, and the images we see in the media, they show us the world is a very, very strange place.
But when we look at the Dollar Street images, they do not look like that.
So using Dollar Street, we can use photos as data, and country stereotypes -- they simply fall apart.
So the person staring back at us from the other side of the world actually looks quite a lot like you.
And that implies both a call to action and a reason for hope.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to talk about penguins today.
But first, I want to start by saying that we need a new operating system, for the oceans and for the Earth.
When I came to the Galapagos 40 years ago, there were 3,000 people that lived in the Galapagos.
Now there are over 30,000.
There were two Jeeps on Santa Cruz.
Now, there are around a thousand trucks and buses and cars there.
So the fundamental problems that we face are overconsumption and too many people.
It's the same problems in the Galapagos, except, obviously, it's worse here, in some ways, than other places.
Because we've only doubled the population of the Earth since the 1960s -- a little more than doubled -- but we have 6.7 billion people in the world, and we all like to consume.
And one of the major problems that we have is our operating system is not giving us the proper feedback.
We're not paying the true environmental costs of our actions.
And when I came at age 22 to live on Fernandina, let me just say, that I had never camped before.
I had never lived alone for any period of time, and I'd never slept with sea lions snoring next to me all night.
But moreover, I'd never lived on an uninhabited island.
Punta Espinosa is where I lived for over a year, and we call it uninhabited because there are no people there.
But it's alive with life; it's hardly uninhabited.
So a lot has happened in the last 40 years, and what I learned when I came to the Galapagos is the importance of wild places, wild things, certainly wildlife, and the amazing qualities that penguins have.
Penguins are real athletes: They can swim 173 kilometers in a day.
They can swim at the same speed day and night -- that's faster than any Olympic swimmer.
I mean, they can do like seven kilometers an hour and sustain it.
But what is really amazing, because of this deepness here, Emperor penguins can go down more than 500 meters and they can hold their breath for 23 minutes.
Magellanic penguins, the ones that I work on, they can dive to about 90 meters and they can stay down for about 4.6 minutes.
Humans, without fins: 90 meters, 3.5 minutes.
And I doubt anybody in this room could really hold their breath for 3.5 minutes.
You have to train to be able to do that.
So penguins are amazing athletes.
The other thing is, I've never met anybody that really doesn't say that they like penguins.
They're comical, they walk upright, and, of course, they're diligent.
And, more importantly, they're well-dressed.
So they have all the criteria that people normally like.
But scientifically, they're amazing because they're sentinels.
They tell us about our world in a lot of different ways, and particularly the ocean.
This is a picture of a Galapagos penguin that's on the front of a little zodiac here in the Galapagos.
And that's what I came to study.
I thought I was going to study the social behavior of Galapagos penguins, but you already know penguins are rare.
These are the rarest penguins in the world.
Why I thought I was going to be able to do that, I don't know.
But the population has changed dramatically since I was first here.
When I counted penguins for the first time and tried to do a census, we just counted all the individual beaks that we could around all these islands.
We counted around 2,000, so I don't know how many penguins there really are, but I know I can count 2,000.
If you go and do it now, the national parks count about 500.
So we have a quarter of the penguins that we did 40 years ago.
And this is true of most of our living systems.
We have less than we had before, and most of them are in fairly steep decline.
And I want to just show you a little bit about why.
(Braying) That's a penguin braying to tell you that it's important to pay attention to penguins.
Most important of all, I didn't know what that was the first time I heard it.
And you can imagine sleeping on Fernandina your first night there and you hear this lonesome, plaintful call.
I fell in love with penguins, and it certainly has changed the rest of my life.
What I found out I was studying is really the difference in how the Galapagos changes, the most extreme variation.
You've heard about these El Ninos, but this is the extreme that penguins all over the world have to adapt to.
This is a cold-water event called La Nina.
Where it's blue and it's green, it means the water is really cold.
And so you can see this current coming up -- in this case, the Humboldt Current -- that comes all the way out to the Galapagos Islands, and this deep undersea current, the Cromwell Current, that upwells around the Galapagos.
That brings all the nutrients: When this is cold in the Galapagos, it's rich, and there's plenty of food for everyone.
When we have extreme El Nino events, you see all this red, and you see no green out here around the Galapagos.
That means that there's no upwelling, and there's basically no food.
So it's a real desert for not only for the penguins and the sea lions and the marine iguanas ...
things die when there's no food.
But we didn't even know that that affected the Galapagos when I went to study penguins.
And you can imagine being on an island hoping you're going to see penguins, and you're in the middle of an El Nino event and there are no penguins.
They're not breeding; they're not even around.
I studied marine iguanas at that point.
But this is a global phenomenon, we know that.
And if you look along the coast of Argentina, where I work now, at a place called Punta Tombo -- the largest Magellanic penguin colony in the world down here about 44 degrees south latitude -- you see that there's great variation here.
Some years, the cold water goes all the way up to Brazil, and other years, in these La Nina years, it doesn't.
So the oceans don't always act together; they act differently, but that is the kind of variation that penguins have to live with, and it's not easy.
So when I went to study the Magellanic penguins, I didn't have any problems.
There were plenty of them.
This is a picture at Punta Tombo in February showing all the penguins along the beach.
I went there because the Japanese wanted to start harvesting them and turning them into high fashion golf gloves, protein and oil.
Fortunately, nobody has harvested any penguins and we're getting over 100,000 tourists a year to see them.
But the population is declining and it's declined fairly substantially, about 21 percent since 1987, when I started these surveys, in terms of number of active nests.
Here, you can see where Punta Tombo is, and they breed in incredibly dense colonies.
We know this because of long-term science, because we have long-term studies there.
And science is important in informing decision makers, and also in changing how we do and knowing the direction of change that we're going in.
And so we have this penguin project. The Wildlife Conservation Society has funded me along with a lot of individuals over the last 27 years to be able to produce these kinds of maps.
And also, we know that it's not only Galapagos penguins that are in trouble, but Magellanics and many other species of penguins.
And so we have started a global penguin society to try to focus on the real plight of penguins.
This is one of the plights of penguins: oil pollution.
Penguins don't like oil and they don't like to swim through oil.
The nice thing is, if you look down here in Argentina, there's no surface oil pollution from this composite map.
But, in fact, when we went to Argentina, penguins were often found totally covered in oil.
So they were just minding their own business.
They ended up swimming through ballast water that had oil in it.
Because when tankers carry oil they have to have ballast at some point, so when they're empty, they have the ballast water in there.
When they come back, they actually dump this oily ballast water into the ocean.
Why do they do that? Because it's cheaper, because they don't pay the real environmental costs.
We usually don't, and we want to start getting the accounting system right so we can pay the real cost.
At first, the Argentine government said, "No, there's no way.
You can't find oiled penguins in Argentina.
We have laws, and we can't have illegal dumping; it's against the law."
So we ended up spending nine years convincing the government that there were lots of oiled penguins.
In some years, like this year, we found more than 80 percent of the adult penguins dead on the beach were covered in oil.
These little blue dots are the fledglings -- we do this survey every March -- which means that they're only in the environment from January until March, so maybe three months at the most that they could get covered in oil.
And you can see, in some years over 60 percent of the fledglings were oiled.
Eventually, the government listened and, amazingly, they changed their laws.
They moved the tanker lanes 40 kilometers farther off shore, and people are not doing as much illegal dumping.
So what we're seeing now is very few penguins are oiled.
Why are there even these penguins oiled?
Because we've solved the problem in Chubut province, which is like a state in Argentina where Punta Tombo is -- so that's about 1,000 kilometers of coastline -- but we haven't solved the problem in northern Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil.
So now I want to show you that penguins are affected.
I'm just going to talk about two things.
This is climate change. Now this has really been a fun study because I put satellite tags on the back of these Magellanic penguins.
Try to convince donors to give you a couple thousand dollars to glue a satellite tag on the back of penguins.
But we've been doing this now for more than a decade to learn where they go.
We thought we needed a marine protected area of about 30 kilometers, and then we put a satellite tag on the back of a penguin.
And what the penguins show us -- and these are all the little dots from where the penguins' positions were for penguins in incubation in 2003 -- and what you see is some of these individuals are going 800 kilometers away from their nests.
So that means as their mate is sitting on the nest incubating the eggs, the other one is out there foraging, and the longer they have to stay gone, the worse condition the mate is in when the mate comes back.
And, of course, all of this then leads to a vicious cycle and you can't raise a lot of chicks.
Here you see in 2003 -- these are all the dots of where the penguins are -- they were raising a little over a half of a chick.
Here, you can see in 2006, they raised almost three quarters of a chick per nest, and you can see that they're closer to Punta Tombo; they're not going as far away.
This past year, in 2009, you can see that they're now raising about a fourth of a chick, and some of these individuals are going more than 900 kilometers away from their nests.
So it's kind of like you having a job in Chicago, and then you get transferred to St. Louis, and your mate is not happy about this because you've got to pay airfare, because you're gone longer.
The same thing's true for penguins as well.
And they're going about, on average now, 40 kilometers farther than they did a decade ago.
We need to be able to get information out to the general public.
And so we started a publication with the Society for Conservation that we think presents cutting-edge science in a new, novel way, because we have reporters that are good writers that actually can distill the information and make it accessible to the general public.
So if you're interested in cutting-edge science and smarter conservation, you should join with our 11 partners -- some of them here in this room, like the Nature Conservancy -- and look at this magazine because we need to get information out about conservation to the general public.
Lastly I want to say that all of you, probably, have had some relationship at some time in your life with a dog, a cat, some sort of pet, and you recognized that those are individuals.
And some of you consider them almost part of your family.
If you had a relationship with a penguin, you'd see it in the same sort of way.
They're amazing creatures that really change how you view the world because they're not that different from us: They're trying to make a living, they're trying to raise their offspring, they're trying to get on and survive in the world.
This is Turbo the Penguin.
Turbo's never been fed.
He met us and got his name because he started standing under my diesel truck: a turbo truck, so we named him Turbo.
Turbo has taken to knocking on the door with his beak, we let him in and he comes in here.
And I just wanted to show you what happened one day when Turbo brought in a friend.
So this is Turbo.
He's coming up to one of my graduate students and flipper patting, which he would do to a female penguin.
And you can see, he's not trying to bite.
This guy has never been in before and he's trying to figure out, "What is going on?
What is this guy doing?
This is really pretty weird."
And you'll see soon that my graduate student ...
and you see, Turbo's pretty intent on his flipper patting.
And now he's looking at the other guy, saying, "You are really weird."
And now look at this: not friendly.
So penguins really differ in their personalities just like our dogs and our cats.
We're also trying to collect our information and become more technologically literate.
So we're trying to put that in computers in the field.
And penguins are always involved in helping us or not helping us in one way or another.
This is a radio frequency ID system.
You put a little piece of rice in the foot of a penguin that has a barcode, so it tells you who it is.
It walks over the pad, and you know who it is.
Okay, so here are a few penguins coming in.
See, this one's coming back to its nest.
They're all coming in at this time, walking across there, just kind of leisurely coming in.
Here's a female that's in a hurry. She's got food.
She's really rushing back, because it's hot, to try to feed her chicks.
And then there's another fellow that will leisurely come by.
Look how fat he is. He's walking back to feed his chicks.
Then I realize that they're playing king of the box.
This is my box up here, and this is the system that works.
You can see this penguin, he goes over, he looks at those wires, does not like that wire.
He unplugs the wire; we have no data.
(Laughter) So, they really are pretty amazing creatures.
OK.
Most important thing is: Only you can change yourself, and only you can change the world and make it better, for people as well as penguins.
So, thank you very much. (Applause)
For the next few minutes we're going to talk about energy, and it's going to be a bit of a varied talk.
I'll try to spin a story about energy, and oil's a convenient starting place.
The talk will be broadly about energy, but oil's a good place to start.
And one of the reasons is this is remarkable stuff.
You take about eight or so carbon atoms, about 20 hydrogen atoms, you put them together in exactly the right way and you get this marvelous liquid: very energy-dense and very easy to refine into a number of very useful products and fuels.
It's great stuff.
Now, as far as it goes, there's a lot of oil out there in the world.
Here's my little pocket map of where it's all located.
A bigger one for you to look at.
But this is it, this is the oil in the world.
Geologists have a pretty good idea of where the oil is.
This is about 100 trillion gallons of crude oil still to be developed and produced in the world today.
Now, that's just one story about oil, and we could end it there and say, "Well, oil's going to last forever because, well, there's just a lot of it."
But there's actually more to the story than that.
Oh, by the way, if you think you're very far from some of this oil, 1000 meters below where you're all sitting is one of the largest producing oil fields in the world.
Come talk to me about it, I'll fill in some of the details if you want.
So, that's one of the stories of oil; there's just a lot of it.
But what about oil? Where is it in the energy system?
Here's a little snapshot of 150 years of oil, and it's been a dominant part of our energy system for most of those 150 years.
Now, here's another little secret I'm going to tell you about: For the last 25 years, oil has been playing less and less of a role in global energy systems.
There was one kind of peak oil in 1985, when oil represented 50 percent of global energy supply.
Now, it's about 35 percent.
It's been declining and I believe it will continue to decline.
Gasoline consumption in the U.S. probably peaked in 2007 and is declining.
So oil is playing a less significant role every year.
And so, 25 years ago, there was a peak oil; just like, in the 1920s, there was a peak coal; and a hundred years before that, there was a peak wood.
This is a very important picture of the evolution of energy systems.
And what's been taking up the slack in the last few decades?
Well, a lot of natural gas and a little bit of nuclear, for starters.
And what goes on in the future?
Well, I think out ahead of us a few decades is peak gas, and beyond that, peak renewables.
Now, I'll tell you another little, very important story about this picture.
Now, I'm not pretending that energy use in total isn't increasing, it is -- that's another part of the story. Come talk to me about it, we'll fill in some of the details -- but there's a very important message here: This is 200 years of history, and for 200 years we've been systematically decarbonizing our energy system.
Energy systems of the world becoming progressively -- year on year, decade on decade, century on century -- becoming less carbon intense.
And that continues into the future with the renewables that we're developing today, reaching maybe 30 percent of primary energy by mid century.
Now that might be the end of the story -- Okay, we just replace it all with conventional renewables -- but I think, actually, there's more to the story than that.
And to tell the next part of the story -- and this is looking out say 2100 and beyond.
What is the future of truly sustainable, carbon-free energy?
Well, we have to take a little excursion, and we'll start in central Texas.
Here's a piece of limestone.
I picked it up outside of Marble Falls, Texas.
It's about 400 million years old.
And it's just limestone, nothing really special about it.
Now, here's a piece of chalk.
I picked this up at MIT. It's a little younger.
And it's different than this limestone, you can see that.
You wouldn't build a building out of this stuff, and you wouldn't try to give a lecture and write on the chalkboard with this.
Yeah, it's very different -- no, it's not different.
It's not different, it's the same stuff: calcium carbonate, calcium carbonate.
What's different is how the molecules are put together.
Now, if you think that's kind of neat, the story gets really neat right now.
Off the coast of California comes this: It's an abalone shell.
Now, millions of abalone every year make this shell.
Oh, by the way, just in case you weren't already guessing, it's calcium carbonate.
It's the same stuff as this and the same stuff as this.
But it's not the same stuff; it's different.
It's thousands of times, maybe 3,000 times tougher than this.
And why? Because the lowly abalone is able to lay down the calcium carbonate crystals in layers, making this beautiful, iridescent mother of pearl.
Very specialized material that the abalone self-assembles, millions of abalone, all the time, every day, every year.
This is pretty incredible stuff.
All the same, what's different?
How the molecules are put together.
Now, what does this have to do with energy?
Here's a piece of coal.
And I'll suggest that this coal is about as exciting as this chalk.
Now, whether we're talking about fuels or energy carriers, or perhaps novel materials for batteries or fuel cells, nature hasn't ever built those perfect materials yet because nature didn't need to.
Nature didn't need to because, unlike the abalone shell, the survival of a species didn't depend on building those materials, until maybe now when it might just matter.
So, when we think about the future of energy, imagine what would it be like if instead of this, we could build the energy equivalent of this just by rearranging the molecules differently.
And so that is my story.
The oil will never run out.
It's not because we have a lot of it.
It's not because we're going to build a bajillion windmills.
It's because, well, thousands of years ago, people invented ideas -- they had ideas, innovations, technology -- and the Stone Age ended, not because we ran out of stones.
(Laughter) It's ideas, it's innovation, it's technology that will end the age of oil, long before we run out of oil.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
We're here today to announce the first synthetic cell, a cell made by starting with the digital code in the computer, building the chromosome from four bottles of chemicals, assembling that chromosome in yeast, transplanting it into a recipient bacterial cell and transforming that cell into a new bacterial species.
So this is the first self-replicating species that we've had on the planet whose parent is a computer.
It also is the first species to have its own website encoded in its genetic code.
But we'll talk more about the watermarks in a minute.
This is a project that had its inception 15 years ago when our team then -- we called the institute TIGR -- was involved in sequencing the first two genomes in history.
We did Haemophilus influenzae and then the smallest genome of a self-replicating organism, that of Mycoplasma genitalium.
And as soon as we had these two sequences we thought, if this is supposed to be the smallest genome of a self-replicating species, could there be even a smaller genome?
Could we understand the basis of cellular life at the genetic level?
It's been a 15-year quest just to get to the starting point now to be able to answer those questions, because it's very difficult to eliminate multiple genes from a cell.
You can only do them one at a time.
We decided early on that we had to take a synthetic route, even though nobody had been there before, to see if we could synthesize a bacterial chromosome so we could actually vary the gene content to understand the essential genes for life.
That started our 15-year quest to get here.
But before we did the first experiments, we actually asked Art Caplan's team at the University of Pennsylvania to undertake a review of what the risks, the challenges, the ethics around creating new species in the laboratory were because it hadn't been done before.
They spent about two years reviewing that independently and published their results in Science in 1999.
Ham and I took two years off as a side project to sequence the human genome, but as soon as that was done we got back to the task at hand.
In 2002, we started a new institute, the Institute for Biological Energy Alternatives, where we set out two goals: One, to understand the impact of our technology on the environment, and how to understand the environment better, and two, to start down this process of making synthetic life to understand basic life.
In 2003, we published our first success.
So Ham Smith and Clyde Hutchison developed some new methods for making error-free DNA at a small level.
Our first task was a 5,000-letter code bacteriophage, a virus that attacks only E. coli.
So that was the phage phi X 174, which was chosen for historical reasons.
It was the first DNA phage, DNA virus, DNA genome that was actually sequenced.
So once we realized that we could make 5,000-base pair viral-sized pieces, we thought, we at least have the means then to try and make serially lots of these pieces to be able to eventually assemble them together to make this mega base chromosome.
So, substantially larger than we even thought we would go initially.
There were several steps to this. There were two sides: We had to solve the chemistry for making large DNA molecules, and we had to solve the biological side of how, if we had this new chemical entity, how would we boot it up, activate it in a recipient cell.
We had two teams working in parallel: one team on the chemistry, and the other on trying to be able to transplant entire chromosomes to get new cells.
When we started this out, we thought the synthesis would be the biggest problem, which is why we chose the smallest genome.
And some of you have noticed that we switched from the smallest genome to a much larger one.
And we can walk through the reasons for that, but basically the small cell took on the order of one to two months to get results from, whereas the larger, faster-growing cell takes only two days.
So there's only so many cycles we could go through in a year at six weeks per cycle.
And you should know that basically 99, probably 99 percent plus of our experiments failed.
So this was a debugging, problem-solving scenario from the beginning because there was no recipe of how to get there.
So, one of the most important publications we had was in 2007.
Carole Lartigue led the effort to actually transplant a bacterial chromosome from one bacteria to another.
I think philosophically, that was one of the most important papers that we've ever done because it showed how dynamic life was.
And we knew, once that worked, that we actually had a chance if we could make the synthetic chromosomes to do the same with those.
We didn't know that it was going to take us several years more to get there.
In 2008, we reported the complete synthesis of the Mycoplasma genitalium genome, a little over 500,000 letters of genetic code, but we have not yet succeeded in booting up that chromosome.
We think in part, because of its slow growth and, in part, cells have all kinds of unique defense mechanisms to keep these events from happening.
It turned out the cell that we were trying to transplant into had a nuclease, an enzyme that chews up DNA on its surface, and was happy to eat the synthetic DNA that we gave it and never got transplantations.
But at the time, that was the largest molecule of a defined structure that had been made.
And so both sides were progressing, but part of the synthesis had to be accomplished or was able to be accomplished using yeast, putting the fragments in yeast and yeast would assemble these for us.
It's an amazing step forward, but we had a problem because now we had the bacterial chromosomes growing in yeast.
So in addition to doing the transplant, we had to find out how to get a bacterial chromosome out of the eukaryotic yeast into a form where we could transplant it into a recipient cell.
So our team developed new techniques for actually growing, cloning entire bacterial chromosomes in yeast.
So we took the same mycoides genome that Carole had initially transplanted, and we grew that in yeast as an artificial chromosome.
And we thought this would be a great test bed for learning how to get chromosomes out of yeast and transplant them.
When we did these experiments, though, we could get the chromosome out of yeast but it wouldn't transplant and boot up a cell.
That little issue took the team two years to solve.
It turns out, the DNA in the bacterial cell was actually methylated, and the methylation protects it from the restriction enzyme, from digesting the DNA.
So what we found is if we took the chromosome out of yeast and methylated it, we could then transplant it.
Further advances came when the team removed the restriction enzyme genes from the recipient capricolum cell.
And once we had done that, now we can take naked DNA out of yeast and transplant it.
So last fall when we published the results of that work in Science, we all became overconfident and were sure we were only a few weeks away from being able to now boot up a chromosome out of yeast.
Because of the problems with Mycoplasma genitalium and its slow growth about a year and a half ago, we decided to synthesize the much larger chromosome, the mycoides chromosome, knowing that we had the biology worked out on that for transplantation.
And Dan led the team for the synthesis of this over one-million-base pair chromosome.
But it turned out it wasn't going to be as simple in the end, and it set us back three months because we had one error out of over a million base pairs in that sequence.
So the team developed new debugging software, where we could test each synthetic fragment to see if it would grow in a background of wild type DNA.
And we found that 10 out of the 11 100,000-base pair pieces we synthesized were completely accurate and compatible with a life-forming sequence.
We narrowed it down to one fragment; we sequenced it and found just one base pair had been deleted in an essential gene.
So accuracy is essential.
There's parts of the genome where it cannot tolerate even a single error, and then there's parts of the genome where we can put in large blocks of DNA, as we did with the watermarks, and it can tolerate all kinds of errors.
So it took about three months to find that error and repair it.
And then early one morning, at 6 a.m.
we got a text from Dan saying that, now, the first blue colonies existed.
So, it's been a long route to get here: 15 years from the beginning.
We felt one of the tenets of this field was to make absolutely certain we could distinguish synthetic DNA from natural DNA.
Early on, when you're working in a new area of science, you have to think about all the pitfalls and things that could lead you to believe that you had done something when you hadn't, and, even worse, leading others to believe it.
So, we thought the worst problem would be a single molecule contamination of the native chromosome, leading us to believe that we actually had created a synthetic cell, when it would have been just a contaminant.
So early on, we developed the notion of putting in watermarks in the DNA to absolutely make clear that the DNA was synthetic.
And the first chromosome we built in 2008 -- the 500,000-base pair one -- we simply assigned the names of the authors of the chromosome into the genetic code, but it was using just amino acid single letter translations, which leaves out certain letters of the alphabet.
So the team actually developed a new code within the code within the code.
So it's a new code for interpreting and writing messages in DNA.
Now, mathematicians have been hiding and writing messages in the genetic code for a long time, but it's clear they were mathematicians and not biologists because, if you write long messages with the code that the mathematicians developed, it would more than likely lead to new proteins being synthesized with unknown functions.
So the code that Mike Montague and the team developed actually puts frequent stop codons, so it's a different alphabet but allows us to use the entire English alphabet with punctuation and numbers.
So, there are four major watermarks all over 1,000 base pairs of genetic code.
The first one actually contains within it this code for interpreting the rest of the genetic code.
So in the remaining information, in the watermarks, contain the names of, I think it's 46 different authors and key contributors to getting the project to this stage.
And we also built in a website address so that if somebody decodes the code within the code within the code, they can send an email to that address.
So it's clearly distinguishable from any other species, having 46 names in it, its own web address.
And we added three quotations, because with the first genome we were criticized for not trying to say something more profound than just signing the work.
So we won't give the rest of the code, but we will give the three quotations.
The first is, "To live, to err, to fall, to triumph and to recreate life out of life."
It's a James Joyce quote.
The second quotation is, "See things not as they are, but as they might be."
It's a quote from the "American Prometheus" book on Robert Oppenheimer.
And the last one is a Richard Feynman quote: "What I cannot build, I cannot understand."
So, because this is as much a philosophical advance as a technical advance in science, we tried to deal with both the philosophical and the technical side.
The last thing I want to say before turning it over to questions is that the extensive work that we've done -- asking for ethical review, pushing the envelope on that side as well as the technical side -- this has been broadly discussed in the scientific community, in the policy community and at the highest levels of the federal government.
Even with this announcement, as we did in 2003 -- that work was funded by the Department of Energy, so the work was reviewed at the level of the White House, trying to decide whether to classify the work or publish it.
And they came down on the side of open publication, which is the right approach -- we've briefed the White House, we've briefed members of Congress, we've tried to take and push the policy issues in parallel with the scientific advances.
So with that, I would like to open it first to the floor for questions.
Yes, in the back.
Reporter: Could you explain, in layman's terms, how significant a breakthrough this is please?
Craig Venter: Can we explain how significant this is?
I'm not sure we're the ones that should be explaining how significant it is.
It's significant to us.
Perhaps it's a giant philosophical change in how we view life.
We actually view it as a baby step in terms of, it's taken us 15 years to be able to do the experiment we wanted to do 15 years ago on understanding life at its basic level.
But we actually believe this is going to be a very powerful set of tools and we're already starting in numerous avenues to use this tool.
We have, at the Institute, ongoing funding now from NIH in a program with Novartis to try and use these new synthetic DNA tools to perhaps make the flu vaccine that you might get next year.
Because instead of taking weeks to months to make these, Dan's team can now make these in less than 24 hours.
So when you see how long it took to get an H1N1 vaccine out, we think we can shorten that process quite substantially.
In the vaccine area, Synthetic Genomics and the Institute are forming a new vaccine company because we think these tools can affect vaccines to diseases that haven't been possible to date, things where the viruses rapidly evolve, such with rhinovirus.
Wouldn't it be nice to have something that actually blocked common colds?
Or, more importantly, HIV, where the virus evolves so quickly the vaccines that are made today can't keep up with those evolutionary changes.
Also, at Synthetic Genomics, we've been working on major environmental issues.
I think this latest oil spill in the Gulf is a reminder.
We can't see CO2 -- we depend on scientific measurements for it and we see the beginning results of having too much of it -- but we can see pre-CO2 now floating on the waters and contaminating the beaches in the Gulf.
We need some alternatives for oil.
We have a program with Exxon Mobile to try and develop new strains of algae that can efficiently capture carbon dioxide from the atmosphere or from concentrated sources, make new hydrocarbons that can go into their refineries to make normal gasoline and diesel fuel out of CO2.
Those are just a couple of the approaches and directions that we're taking.
(Applause)
I was here four years ago, and I remember, at the time, that the talks weren't put online.
I think they were given to TEDsters in a box, a box set of DVDs, which they put on their shelves, where they are now.
(Laughter) And actually, Chris called me a week after I'd given my talk, and said, "We're going to start putting them online. Can we put yours online?"
And I said, "Sure."
And four years later, it's been downloaded four million times.
So I suppose you could multiply that by 20 or something to get the number of people who've seen it.
And, as Chris says, there is a hunger for videos of me.
(Laughter) (Applause) Don't you feel?
(Laughter) So, this whole event has been an elaborate build-up to me doing another one for you, so here it is.
(Laughter) Al Gore spoke at the TED conference I spoke at four years ago and talked about the climate crisis.
And I referenced that at the end of my last talk.
So I want to pick up from there because I only had 18 minutes, frankly.
(Laughter) So, as I was saying -- (Laughter) You see, he's right.
I mean, there is a major climate crisis, obviously, and I think if people don't believe it, they should get out more.
(Laughter) But I believe there is a second climate crisis, which is as severe, which has the same origins, and that we have to deal with with the same urgency.
And you may say, by the way, "Look, I'm good.
I have one climate crisis, I don't really need the second one."
(Laughter) But this is a crisis of, not natural resources -- though I believe that's true -- but a crisis of human resources.
I believe fundamentally, as many speakers have said during the past few days, that we make very poor use of our talents.
Very many people go through their whole lives having no real sense of what their talents may be, or if they have any to speak of.
I meet all kinds of people who don't think they're really good at anything.
Actually, I kind of divide the world into two groups now.
Jeremy Bentham, the great utilitarian philosopher, once spiked this argument.
He said, "There are two types of people in this world: those who divide the world into two types and those who do not."
(Laughter) Well, I do.
(Laughter) I meet all kinds of people who don't enjoy what they do.
They simply go through their lives getting on with it.
They get no great pleasure from what they do.
They endure it rather than enjoy it, and wait for the weekend.
But I also meet people who love what they do and couldn't imagine doing anything else.
If you said, "Don't do this anymore," they'd wonder what you're talking about.
They say, "But this is me, you know.
It would be foolish to abandon this, because it speaks to my most authentic self."
And it's not true of enough people.
In fact, on the contrary, I think it's still true of a minority of people.
And I think there are many possible explanations for it.
And high among them is education, because education, in a way, dislocates very many people from their natural talents.
And human resources are like natural resources; they're often buried deep.
You have to go looking for them, they're not just lying around on the surface.
You have to create the circumstances where they show themselves.
And you might imagine education would be the way that happens, but too often, it's not.
Every education system in the world is being reformed at the moment and it's not enough.
Reform is no use anymore, because that's simply improving a broken model.
What we need -- and the word's been used many times in the past few days -- is not evolution, but a revolution in education.
This has to be transformed into something else.
(Applause) One of the real challenges is to innovate fundamentally in education.
Innovation is hard, because it means doing something that people don't find very easy, for the most part.
It means challenging what we take for granted, things that we think are obvious.
The great problem for reform or transformation is the tyranny of common sense.
Things that people think, "It can't be done differently, that's how it's done."
I came across a great quote recently from Abraham Lincoln, who I thought you'd be pleased to have quoted at this point.
(Laughter) He said this in December 1862 to the second annual meeting of Congress.
I ought to explain that I have no idea what was happening at the time.
We don't teach American history in Britain.
(Laughter) We suppress it. You know, this is our policy.
(Laughter) No doubt, something fascinating was happening then, which the Americans among us will be aware of.
But he said this: "The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present.
The occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with the occasion."
I love that.
"As our case is new, so we must think anew and act anew.
We must disenthrall ourselves, and then we shall save our country."
I love that word, "disenthrall."
You know what it means?
That there are ideas that all of us are enthralled to, which we simply take for granted as the natural order of things, the way things are.
And many of our ideas have been formed, not to meet the circumstances of this century, but to cope with the circumstances of previous centuries.
But our minds are still hypnotized by them, and we have to disenthrall ourselves of some of them.
Now, doing this is easier said than done.
It's very hard to know, by the way, what it is you take for granted.
And the reason is that you take it for granted.
(Laughter) Let me ask you something you may take for granted.
How many of you here are over the age of 25?
That's not what you take for granted, I'm sure you're familiar with that.
Are there any people here under the age of 25?
Great. Now, those over 25, could you put your hands up if you're wearing your wristwatch?
Now that's a great deal of us, isn't it?
Ask a room full of teenagers the same thing.
Teenagers do not wear wristwatches.
I don't mean they can't, they just often choose not to.
And the reason is we were brought up in a pre-digital culture, those of us over 25.
And so for us, if you want to know the time, you have to wear something to tell it.
Kids now live in a world which is digitized, and the time, for them, is everywhere.
They see no reason to do this.
And by the way, you don't need either; it's just that you've always done it and you carry on doing it.
My daughter never wears a watch, my daughter Kate, who's 20.
She doesn't see the point.
As she says, "It's a single-function device."
(Laughter) "Like, how lame is that?"
And I say, "No, no, it tells the date as well."
(Laughter) "It has multiple functions."
(Laughter) But, you see, there are things we're enthralled to in education.
A couple of examples.
One of them is the idea of linearity: that it starts here and you go through a track and if you do everything right, you will end up set for the rest of your life.
Everybody who's spoken at TED has told us implicitly, or sometimes explicitly, a different story: that life is not linear; it's organic.
We create our lives symbiotically as we explore our talents in relation to the circumstances they help to create for us.
But, you know, we have become obsessed with this linear narrative.
And probably the pinnacle for education is getting you to college.
I think we are obsessed with getting people to college.
Certain sorts of college.
I don't mean you shouldn't go, but not everybody needs to go, or go now.
Maybe they go later, not right away.
And I was up in San Francisco a while ago doing a book signing.
There was this guy buying a book, he was in his 30s.
I said, "What do you do?"
And he said, "I'm a fireman."
I asked, "How long have you been a fireman?"
"Always. I've always been a fireman."
"Well, when did you decide?" He said, "As a kid.
Actually, it was a problem for me at school, because at school, everybody wanted to be a fireman."
(Laughter) He said, "But I wanted to be a fireman."
And he said, "When I got to the senior year of school, my teachers didn't take it seriously.
This one teacher didn't take it seriously.
He said I was throwing my life away if that's all I chose to do with it; that I should go to college, I should become a professional person, that I had great potential and I was wasting my talent to do that."
He said, "It was humiliating.
It was in front of the whole class and I felt dreadful.
But it's what I wanted, and as soon as I left school, I applied to the fire service and I was accepted.
You know, I was thinking about that guy recently, just a few minutes ago when you were speaking, about this teacher, because six months ago, I saved his life."
(Laughter) He said, "He was in a car wreck, and I pulled him out, gave him CPR, and I saved his wife's life as well."
He said, "I think he thinks better of me now."
(Laughter) (Applause) You know, to me, human communities depend upon a diversity of talent, not a singular conception of ability.
And at the heart of our challenges -- (Applause) At the heart of the challenge is to reconstitute our sense of ability and of intelligence.
This linearity thing is a problem.
When I arrived in L.A. about nine years ago, I came across a policy statement -- very well-intentioned -- which said, "College begins in kindergarten."
No, it doesn't.
(Laughter) It doesn't.
If we had time, I could go into this, but we don't.
(Laughter) Kindergarten begins in kindergarten.
(Laughter) A friend of mine once said, "A three year-old is not half a six year-old."
(Laughter) (Applause) They're three.
But as we just heard in this last session, there's such competition now to get into kindergarten -- to get to the right kindergarten -- that people are being interviewed for it at three.
Kids sitting in front of unimpressed panels, you know, with their resumes -- (Laughter) Flicking through and saying, "What, this is it?"
(Laughter) (Applause) "You've been around for 36 months, and this is it?"
(Laughter) "You've achieved nothing -- commit.
(Laughter) Spent the first six months breastfeeding, I can see."
(Laughter) See, it's outrageous as a conception.
The other big issue is conformity.
We have built our education systems on the model of fast food.
This is something Jamie Oliver talked about the other day.
There are two models of quality assurance in catering.
One is fast food, where everything is standardized.
The other is like Zagat and Michelin restaurants, where everything is not standardized, they're customized to local circumstances.
And we have sold ourselves into a fast-food model of education, and it's impoverishing our spirit and our energies as much as fast food is depleting our physical bodies.
(Applause) We have to recognize a couple of things here.
People have very different aptitudes.
I worked out recently that I was given a guitar as a kid at about the same time that Eric Clapton got his first guitar.
(Laughter) It worked out for Eric, that's all I'm saying.
(Laughter) In a way -- it did not for me.
I could not get this thing to work no matter how often or how hard I blew into it.
It just wouldn't work.
(Laughter) But it's not only about that.
It's about passion.
Often, people are good at things they don't really care for.
It's about passion, and what excites our spirit and our energy.
And if you're doing the thing that you love to do, that you're good at, time takes a different course entirely.
My wife's just finished writing a novel, and I think it's a great book, but she disappears for hours on end.
You know this, if you're doing something you love, an hour feels like five minutes.
If you're doing something that doesn't resonate with your spirit, five minutes feels like an hour.
And the reason so many people are opting out of education is because it doesn't feed their spirit, it doesn't feed their energy or their passion.
So I think we have to change metaphors.
We have to go from what is essentially an industrial model of education, a manufacturing model, which is based on linearity and conformity and batching people.
We have to move to a model that is based more on principles of agriculture.
We have to recognize that human flourishing is not a mechanical process; it's an organic process.
And you cannot predict the outcome of human development.
All you can do, like a farmer, is create the conditions under which they will begin to flourish.
So when we look at reforming education and transforming it, it isn't like cloning a system.
There are great ones, like KIPP's; it's a great system.
There are many great models.
It's about customizing to your circumstances and personalizing education to the people you're actually teaching.
And doing that, I think, is the answer to the future because it's not about scaling a new solution; it's about creating a movement in education in which people develop their own solutions, but with external support based on a personalized curriculum.
Now in this room, there are people who represent extraordinary resources in business, in multimedia, in the Internet.
These technologies, combined with the extraordinary talents of teachers, provide an opportunity to revolutionize education.
And I urge you to get involved in it because it's vital, not just to ourselves, but to the future of our children.
But we have to change from the industrial model to an agricultural model, where each school can be flourishing tomorrow.
That's where children experience life.
Or at home, if that's what they choose, to be educated with their families or friends.
There's been a lot of talk about dreams over the course of these few days.
And I wanted to just very quickly -- I was very struck by Natalie Merchant's songs last night, recovering old poems.
I wanted to read you a quick, very short poem from W. B. Yeats, who some of you may know.
He wrote this to his love, Maud Gonne, and he was bewailing the fact that he couldn't really give her what he thought she wanted from him.
And he says, "I've got something else, but it may not be for you."
He says this: "Had I the heavens' embroidered cloths, Enwrought with gold and silver light, The blue and the dim and the dark cloths Of night and light and the half-light, I would spread the cloths under your feet: But I, being poor, have only my dreams; I have spread my dreams under your feet; Tread softly because you tread on my dreams."
And every day, everywhere, our children spread their dreams beneath our feet.
And we should tread softly.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I heard this amazing story about Miuccia Prada.
She's an Italian fashion designer.
She goes to this vintage store in Paris with a friend of hers.
She's rooting around, she finds this one jacket by Balenciaga -- she loves it.
She's turning it inside out.
She's looking at the seams. She's looking at the construction.
Her friend says, "Buy it already."
She said, "I'll buy it, but I'm also going to replicate it."
Now, the academics in this audience may think, "Well, that sounds like plagiarism."
But to a fashionista, what it really is is a sign of Prada's genius: that she can root through the history of fashion and pick the one jacket that doesn't need to be changed by one iota, and to be current and to be now.
You might also be asking whether it's possible that this is illegal for her to do this.
Well, it turns out that it's actually not illegal.
In the fashion industry, there's very little intellectual property protection.
They have trademark protection, but no copyright protection and no patent protection to speak of.
All they have, really, is trademark protection, and so it means that anybody could copy any garment on any person in this room and sell it as their own design.
The only thing that they can't copy is the actual trademark label within that piece of apparel.
That's one reason that you see logos splattered all over these products.
It's because it's a lot harder for knock-off artists to knock off these designs because they can't knock off the logo.
But if you go to Santee Alley, yeah.
(Laughter) Well, yeah.
Canal Street, I know.
And sometimes these are fun, right?
Now, the reason for this, the reason that the fashion industry doesn't have any copyright protection is because the courts decided long ago that apparel is too utilitarian to qualify for copyright protection.
They didn't want a handful of designers owning the seminal building blocks of our clothing.
And then everybody else would have to license this cuff or this sleeve because Joe Blow owns it.
But too utilitarian? I mean is that the way you think of fashion?
This is Vivienne Westwood. No!
We think of it as maybe too silly, too unnecessary.
Now, those of you who are familiar with the logic behind copyright protection -- which is that without ownership, there is no incentive to innovate -- might be really surprised by both the critical success of the fashion industry and the economic success of this industry.
What I'm going to argue today is that because there's no copyright protection in the fashion industry, fashion designers have actually been able to elevate utilitarian design, things to cover our naked bodies, into something that we consider art.
Because there's no copyright protection in this industry, there's a very open and creative ecology of creativity.
Unlike their creative brothers and sisters, who are sculptors or photographers or filmmakers or musicians, fashion designers can sample from all their peers' designs.
They can take any element from any garment from the history of fashion and incorporate it into their own design.
They're also notorious for riffing off of the zeitgeist.
And here, I suspect, they were influenced by the costumes in Avatar.
Maybe just a little.
Can't copyright a costume either.
Now, fashion designers have the broadest palette imaginable in this creative industry.
This wedding dress here is actually made of sporks, and this dress is actually made of aluminum.
I've heard this dress actually sort of sounds like wind chimes as they walk through.
So, one of the magical side effects of having a culture of copying, which is really what it is, is the establishment of trends.
People think this is a magical thing. How does it happen?
Well, it's because it's legal for people to copy one another.
Some people believe that there are a few people at the top of the fashion food chain who sort of dictate to us what we're all going to wear, but if you talk to any designer at any level, including these high-end designers, they always say their main inspiration comes from the street: where people like you and me remix and match our own fashion looks.
And that's where they really get a lot of their creative inspiration, so it's both a top-down and a bottom-up kind of industry.
Now, the fast fashion giants have probably benefited the most from the lack of copyright protection in the fashion industry.
They are notorious for knocking off high-end designs and selling them at very low prices.
And they've been faced with a lot of lawsuits, but those lawsuits are usually not won by fashion designers.
The courts have said over and over again, "You don't need any more intellectual property protection."
When you look at copies like this, you wonder: How do the luxury high-end brands remain in business?
If you can get it for 200 bucks, why pay a thousand?
Well, that's one reason we had a conference here at USC a few years ago.
We invited Tom Ford to come -- the conference was called, "Ready to Share: Fashion and the Ownership of Creativity" -- and we asked him exactly this question.
Here's what he had to say.
He had just come off a successful stint as the lead designer at Gucci, in case you didn't know.
Tom Ford: And we found after much research that -- actually not much research, quite simple research -- that the counterfeit customer was not our customer.
Johanna Blakley: Imagine that.
The people on Santee Alley are not the ones who shop at Gucci.
(Laughter) This is a very different demographic.
And, you know, a knock-off is never the same as an original high-end design, at least in terms of the materials; they're always made of cheaper materials.
But even sometimes a cheaper version can actually have some charming aspects, can breathe a little extra life into a dying trend.
There's lots of virtues of copying.
One that a lot of cultural critics have pointed to is that we now have a much broader palette of design choices to choose from than we ever have before, and this is mainly because of the fast fashion industry, actually.
And this is a good thing. We need lots of options.
Fashion, whether you like it or not, helps you project who you are to the world.
Because of fast fashion, global trends actually get established much more quickly than they used to.
And this, actually, is good news to trendsetters; they want trends to be set so that they can move product.
For fashionistas, they want to stay ahead of the curve.
They don't want to be wearing what everybody else is wearing.
And so, they want to move on to the next trend as soon as possible.
I tell you, there is no rest for the fashionable.
Every season, these designers have to struggle to come up with the new fabulous idea that everybody's going to love.
And this, let me tell you, is very good for the bottom line.
Now of course, there's a bunch of effects that this culture of copying has on the creative process.
And Stuart Weitzman is a very successful shoe designer.
He has complained a lot about people copying him, but in one interview I read, he said it has really forced him to up his game.
He had to come up with new ideas, new things that would be hard to copy.
He came up with this Bowden-wedge heel that has to be made out of steel or titanium; if you make it from some sort of cheaper material, it'll actually crack in two.
It forced him to be a little more innovative. (Music) And that actually reminded me of jazz great, Charlie Parker.
I don't know if you've heard this anecdote, but I have.
He said that one of the reasons he invented bebop was that he was pretty sure that white musicians wouldn't be able to replicate the sound. (Laughter) He wanted to make it too difficult to copy, and that's what fashion designers are doing all the time.
They're trying to put together a signature look, an aesthetic that reflects who they are.
When people knock it off, everybody knows because they've put that look out on the runway, and it's a coherent aesthetic.
I love these Gallianos.
Okay, we'll move on. (Laughter) This is not unlike the world of comedy.
I don't know if you know that jokes also can't be copyright protected.
So when one-liners were really popular, everybody stole them from one another.
But now, we have a different kind of comic.
They develop a persona, a signature style, much like fashion designers.
And their jokes, much like the fashion designs by a fashion designer, really only work within that aesthetic.
If somebody steals a joke from Larry David, for instance, it's not as funny.
Now, the other thing that fashion designers have done to survive in this culture of copying is they've learned how to copy themselves.
They knock themselves off.
They make deals with the fast fashion giants and they come up with a way to sell their product to a whole new demographic: the Santee Alley demographic.
Now, some fashion designers will say, "It's only in the United States that we don't have any respect.
In other countries there is protection for our artful designs."
But if you take a look at the two other biggest markets in the world, it turns out that the protection that's offered is really ineffectual.
In Japan, for instance, which I think is the third largest market, they have a design law; it protects apparel, but the novelty standard is so high, you have to prove that your garment has never existed before, it's totally unique.
And that's sort of like the novelty standard for a U.S. patent, which fashion designers never get -- rarely get here in the states.
In the European Union, they went in the other direction.
Very low novelty standard, anybody can register anything.
But even though it's the home of the fast fashion industry and you have a lot of luxury designers there, they don't register their garments, generally, and there's not a lot of litigation.
It turns out it's because the novelty standard is too low.
A person can come in and take somebody else's gown, cut off three inches from the bottom, go to the E.U. and register it as a new, original design.
So, that does not stop the knock-off artists.
If you look at the registry, actually, a lot of the registered things in the E.U.
are Nike T-shirts that are almost identical to one another.
But this has not stopped Diane von Furstenberg.
She is the head of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, and she has told her constituency that she is going to get copyright protection for fashion designs.
The retailers have kind of quashed this notion though.
I don't think the legislation is going anywhere, because they realized it is so hard to tell the difference between a pirated design and something that's just part of a global trend.
Who owns a look?
That is a very difficult question to answer.
It takes lots of lawyers and lots of court time, and the retailers decided that would be way too expensive.
You know, it's not just the fashion industry that doesn't have copyright protection.
There's a bunch of other industries that don't have copyright protection, including the food industry.
You cannot copyright a recipe because it's a set of instructions, it's fact, and you cannot copyright the look and feel of even the most unique dish.
Same with automobiles.
It doesn't matter how wacky they look or how cool they look, you cannot copyright the sculptural design.
It's a utilitarian article, that's why.
Same with furniture, it's too utilitarian.
Magic tricks, I think they're instructions, sort of like recipes: no copyright protection.
Hairdos, no copyright protection.
Open source software, these guys decided they didn't want copyright protection.
They thought it'd be more innovative without it.
It's really hard to get copyright for databases.
Tattoo artists, they don't want it; it's not cool.
They share their designs.
Jokes, no copyright protection.
Fireworks displays, the rules of games, the smell of perfume: no.
And some of these industries may seem sort of marginal to you, but these are the gross sales for low I.P. industries, industries with very little copyright protection, and there's the gross sales of films and books.
(Applause) It ain't pretty.
(Applause) So you talk to people in the fashion industry and they're like, "Shhh!
Don't tell anybody we can actually steal from each other's designs.
It's embarrassing."
But you know what? It's revolutionary, and it's a model that a lot of other industries -- like the ones we just saw with the really small bars -- they might have to think about this.
Because right now, those industries with a lot of copyright protection are operating in an atmosphere where it's as if they don't have any protection, and they don't know what to do.
When I found out that there are a whole bunch of industries that didn't have copyright protection, I thought, "What exactly is the underlying logic?
I want a picture." And the lawyers do not provide a picture, so I made one.
These are the two main sort of binary oppositions within the logic of copyright law.
It is more complex than this, but this will do.
First: Is something an artistic object?
Then it deserves protection.
Is it a utilitarian object?
Then no, it does not deserve protection.
This is a difficult, unstable binary.
The other one is: Is it an idea?
Is it something that needs to freely circulate in a free society?
No protection.
Or is it a physically fixed expression of an idea: something that somebody made and they deserve to own it for a while and make money from it?
The problem is that digital technology has completely subverted the logic of this physically fixed, expression versus idea concept.
Nowadays, we don't really recognize a book as something that sits on our shelf or music as something that is a physical object that we can hold.
It's a digital file.
It is barely tethered to any sort of physical reality in our minds.
And these things, because we can copy and transmit them so easily, actually circulate within our culture a lot more like ideas than like physically instantiated objects.
Now, the conceptual issues are truly profound when you talk about creativity and ownership and, let me tell you, we don't want to leave this just to lawyers to figure out.
They're smart.
I'm with one. He's my boyfriend, he's okay.
He's smart, he's smart.
But you want an interdisciplinary team of people hashing this out, trying to figure out: What is the kind of ownership model, in a digital world, that's going to lead to the most innovation?
And my suggestion is that fashion might be a really good place to start looking for a model for creative industries in the future.
If you want more information about this research project, please visit our website: it's ReadyToShare.org.
And I really want to thank Veronica Jauriqui for making this very fashionable presentation.
Thank you so much. (Applause)
Today, I want you to look at children who become suicide bombers through a completely different lens.
In 2009, there were 500 bomb blasts across Pakistan.
I spent the year working with children who were training to become suicide bombers and with Taliban recruiters, trying to understand how the Taliban were converting these children into live ammunition and why these children were actively signing up to their cause.
I want you to watch a short video from my latest documentary film, "Children of the Taliban."
(Singing) The Taliban now run their own schools.
They target poor families and convince the parents to send their children.
In return, they provide free food and shelter and sometimes pay the families a monthly stipend.
We've obtained a propaganda video made by the Taliban.
Young boys are taught justifications for suicide attacks and the execution of spies.
I made contact with a child from Swat who studied in a madrassa like this.
Hazrat Ali is from a poor farming family in Swat.
He joined the Taliban a year ago when he was 13.
How do the Taliban in your area get people to join them?
Hazrat Ali: They first call us to the mosque and preach to us.
Then they take us to a madrassa and teach us things from the Koran.
Sharmeen Obaid Chinoy: He tells me that children are then given months of military training.
HA: They teach us to use machine guns, Kalashnikov, rocket launchers, grenades, bombs.
They ask us to use them only against the infidels.
Then they teach us to do a suicide attack.
SOC: Would you like to carry out a suicide attack?
HA: If God gives me strength.
SOC: I, in my research, have seen that the Taliban have perfected the way in which they recruit and train children, and I think it's a five-step process.
Step one is that the Taliban prey on families that are large, that are poor, that live in rural areas.
They separate the parents from the children by promising to provide food, clothing, shelter to these children.
Then they ship them off, hundreds of miles away to hard-line schools that run along the Taliban agenda.
Step two: They teach the children the Koran, which is Islam's holiest book, in Arabic, a language these children do not understand and cannot speak.
They rely very heavily on teachers, who I have personally seen distort the message to these children as and when it suits their purpose to.
These children are explicitly forbidden from reading newspapers, listening to radio, reading any books that the teachers do not prescribe them.
If any child is found violating these rules, he is severely reprimanded.
Effectively, the Taliban create a complete blackout of any other source of information for these children.
Step three: The Taliban want these children to hate the world that they currently live in.
So they beat these children -- I have seen it; they feed them twice a day dried bread and water; they rarely allow them to play games; they tell them that, for eight hours at a time, all they have to do is read the Koran.
The children are virtual prisoners; they cannot leave, they cannot go home.
Their parents are so poor, they have no resources to get them back.
Step four: The older members of the Taliban, the fighters, start talking to the younger boys about the glories of martyrdom.
They talk to them about how when they die, they will be received up with lakes of honey and milk, how there will be 72 virgins waiting for them in paradise, how there will be unlimited food, and how this glory is going to propel them to become heroes in their neighborhoods.
Effectively, this is the brainwashing process that has begun.
Step five: I believe the Taliban have one of the most effective means of propaganda.
Their videos that they use are intercut with photographs of men and women and children dying in Iraq and Afghanistan and in Pakistan.
And the basic message is that the Western powers do not care about civilian deaths, so those people who live in areas and support governments that work with Western powers are fair game.
That's why Pakistani civilians, over 6,000 of whom have been killed in the last two years alone, are fair game.
Now these children are primed to become suicide bombers.
They're ready to go out and fight because they've been told that this is effectively their only way to glorify Islam.
I want you to watch another excerpt from the film.
This boy is called Zenola.
He blew himself up, killing six.
This boy is called Sadik.
He killed 22.
This boy is called Messoud.
He killed 28.
The Taliban are running suicide schools, preparing a generation of boys for atrocities against civilians.
Do you want to carry out a suicide attack?
Boy: I would love to.
But only if I get permission from my dad.
When I look at suicide bombers younger than me, or my age, I get so inspired by their terrific attacks.
SOC: What blessing would you get from carrying out a suicide attack?
Boy: On the day of judgment, God will ask me, "Why did you do that?"
I will answer, "My Lord! Only to make you happy!
I have laid down my life fighting the infidels."
Then God will look at my intention.
If my intention was to eradicate evil for Islam, then I will be rewarded with paradise.
Singer:  On the day of judgment   My God will call me   My body will be put back together   And God will ask me why I did this  SOC: I leave you all with this thought: If you grew up in these circumstances, faced with these choices, would you choose to live in this world or in the glorious afterlife?
As one Taliban recruiter told me, "There will always be sacrificial lambs in this war."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Do you worry about what is going to kill you?
Heart disease, cancer, a car accident?
Most of us worry about things we can't control, like war, terrorism, the tragic earthquake that just occurred in Haiti.
But what really threatens humanity?
A few years ago, Professor Vaclav Smil tried to calculate the probability of sudden disasters large enough to change history.
He called these, "massively fatal discontinuities," meaning that they could kill up to 100 million people in the next 50 years.
He looked at the odds of another world war, of a massive volcanic eruption, even of an asteroid hitting the Earth.
But he placed the likelihood of one such event above all others at close to 100 percent, and that is a severe flu pandemic.
Now, you might think of flu as just a really bad cold, but it can be a death sentence.
Every year, 36,000 people in the United States die of seasonal flu.
In the developing world, the data is much sketchier but the death toll is almost certainly higher.
You know, the problem is if this virus occasionally mutates so dramatically, it essentially is a new virus and then we get a pandemic.
In 1918, a new virus appeared that killed some 50 to 100 million people.
It spread like wildfire and some died within hours of developing symptoms.
Are we safer today?
Well, we seem to have dodged the deadly pandemic this year that most of us feared, but this threat could reappear at any time.
The good news is that we're at a moment in time when science, technology, globalization is converging to create an unprecedented possibility: the possibility to make history by preventing infectious diseases that still account for one-fifth of all deaths and countless misery on Earth.
We can do this.
We're already preventing millions of deaths with existing vaccines, and if we get these to more people, we can certainly save more lives.
But with new or better vaccines for malaria, TB, HIV, pneumonia, diarrhea, flu, we could end suffering that has been on the Earth since the beginning of time.
So, I'm here to trumpet vaccines for you.
But first, I have to explain why they're important because vaccines, the power of them, is really like a whisper.
When they work, they can make history, but after a while you can barely hear them.
Now, some of us are old enough to have a small, circular scar on our arms from an inoculation we received as children.
But when was the last time you worried about smallpox, a disease that killed half a billion people last century and no longer is with us?
Or polio? How many of you remember the iron lung?
We don't see scenes like this anymore because of vaccines.
Now, it's interesting because there are 30-odd diseases that can be treated with vaccines now, but we're still threatened by things like HIV and flu.
Why is that?
Well, here's the dirty little secret.
Until recently, we haven't had to know exactly how a vaccine worked.
We knew they worked through old-fashioned trial and error.
You took a pathogen, you modified it, you injected it into a person or an animal and you saw what happened.
This worked well for most pathogens, somewhat well for crafty bugs like flu, but not at all for HIV, for which humans have no natural immunity.
So let's explore how vaccines work.
They basically create a cache of weapons for your immune system which you can deploy when needed.
Now, when you get a viral infection, what normally happens is it takes days or weeks for your body to fight back at full strength, and that might be too late.
When you're pre-immunized, what happens is you have forces in your body pre-trained to recognize and defeat specific foes.
So that's really how vaccines work.
Now, let's take a look at a video that we're debuting at TED, for the first time, on how an effective HIV vaccine might work.
(Music) Narrator: A vaccine trains the body in advance how to recognize and neutralize a specific invader.
After HIV penetrates the body's mucosal barriers, it infects immune cells to replicate.
The invader draws the attention of the immune system's front-line troops.
Dendritic cells, or macrophages, capture the virus and display pieces of it.
Memory cells generated by the HIV vaccine are activated when they learn HIV is present from the front-line troops.
These memory cells immediately deploy the exact weapons needed.
Memory B cells turn into plasma cells, which produce wave after wave of the specific antibodies that latch onto HIV to prevent it from infecting cells, while squadrons of killer T cells seek out and destroy cells that are already HIV infected.
The virus is defeated.
Without a vaccine, these responses would have taken more than a week.
By that time, the battle against HIV would already have been lost.
Seth Berkley: Really cool video, isn't it?
The antibodies you just saw in this video, in action, are the ones that make most vaccines work.
So the real question then is: How do we ensure that your body makes the exact ones that we need to protect against flu and HIV?
The principal challenge for both of these viruses is that they're always changing.
So let's take a look at the flu virus.
In this rendering of the flu virus, these different colored spikes are what it uses to infect you.
And also, what the antibodies use is a handle to essentially grab and neutralize the virus.
When these mutate, they change their shape, and the antibodies don't know what they're looking at anymore.
So that's why every year you can catch a slightly different strain of flu.
It's also why in the spring, we have to make a best guess at which three strains are going to prevail the next year, put those into a single vaccine and rush those into production for the fall.
Even worse, the most common influenza -- influenza A -- also infects animals that live in close proximity to humans, and they can recombine in those particular animals.
In addition, wild aquatic birds carry all known strains of influenza.
So, you've got this situation: In 2003, we had an H5N1 virus that jumped from birds into humans in a few isolated cases with an apparent mortality rate of 70 percent.
Now luckily, that particular virus, although very scary at the time, did not transmit from person to person very easily.
This year's H1N1 threat was actually a human, avian, swine mixture that arose in Mexico.
It was easily transmitted, but, luckily, was pretty mild.
And so, in a sense, our luck is holding out, but you know, another wild bird could fly over at anytime.
Now let's take a look at HIV.
As variable as flu is, HIV makes flu look like the Rock of Gibraltar.
The virus that causes AIDS is the trickiest pathogen scientists have ever confronted.
It mutates furiously, it has decoys to evade the immune system, it attacks the very cells that are trying to fight it and it quickly hides itself in your genome.
Here's a slide looking at the genetic variation of flu and comparing that to HIV, a much wilder target.
In the video a moment ago, you saw fleets of new viruses launching from infected cells.
Now realize that in a recently infected person, there are millions of these ships; each one is just slightly different.
Finding a weapon that recognizes and sinks all of them makes the job that much harder.
Now, in the 27 years since HIV was identified as the cause of AIDS, we've developed more drugs to treat HIV than all other viruses put together.
These drugs aren't cures, but they represent a huge triumph of science because they take away the automatic death sentence from a diagnosis of HIV, at least for those who can access them.
The vaccine effort though is really quite different.
Large companies moved away from it because they thought the science was so difficult and vaccines were seen as poor business.
Many thought that it was just impossible to make an AIDS vaccine, but today, evidence tells us otherwise.
In September, we had surprising but exciting findings from a clinical trial that took place in Thailand.
For the first time, we saw an AIDS vaccine work in humans -- albeit, quite modestly -- and that particular vaccine was made almost a decade ago.
Newer concepts and early testing now show even greater promise in the best of our animal models.
But in the past few months, researchers have also isolated several new broadly neutralizing antibodies from the blood of an HIV infected individual.
Now, what does this mean?
We saw earlier that HIV is highly variable, that a broad neutralizing antibody latches on and disables multiple variations of the virus.
If you take these and you put them in the best of our monkey models, they provide full protection from infection.
In addition, these researchers found a new site on HIV where the antibodies can grab onto, and what's so special about this spot is that it changes very little as the virus mutates.
It's like, as many times as the virus changes its clothes, it's still wearing the same socks, and now our job is to make sure we get the body to really hate those socks.
So what we've got is a situation.
The Thai results tell us we can make an AIDS vaccine, and the antibody findings tell us how we might do that.
This strategy, working backwards from an antibody to create a vaccine candidate, has never been done before in vaccine research.
It's called retro-vaccinology, and its implications extend way beyond that of just HIV.
So think of it this way.
We've got these new antibodies we've identified, and we know that they latch onto many, many variations of the virus.
We know that they have to latch onto a specific part, so if we can figure out the precise structure of that part, present that through a vaccine, what we hope is we can prompt your immune system to make these matching antibodies.
And that would create a universal HIV vaccine.
Now, it sounds easier than it is because the structure actually looks more like this blue antibody diagram attached to its yellow binding site, and as you can imagine, these three-dimensional structures are much harder to work on.
And if you guys have ideas to help us solve this, we'd love to hear about it.
But, you know, the research that has occurred from HIV now has really helped with innovation with other diseases.
So for instance, a biotechnology company has now found broadly neutralizing antibodies to influenza, as well as a new antibody target on the flu virus.
They're currently making a cocktail -- an antibody cocktail -- that can be used to treat severe, overwhelming cases of flu.
In the longer term, what they can do is use these tools of retro-vaccinology to make a preventive flu vaccine.
Now, retro-vaccinology is just one technique within the ambit of so-called rational vaccine design.
Let me give you another example.
We talked about before the H and N spikes on the surface of the flu virus.
Notice these other, smaller protuberances.
These are largely hidden from the immune system.
Now it turns out that these spots also don't change much when the virus mutates.
If you can cripple these with specific antibodies, you could cripple all versions of the flu.
So far, animal tests indicate that such a vaccine could prevent severe disease, although you might get a mild case.
So if this works in humans, what we're talking about is a universal flu vaccine, one that doesn't need to change every year and would remove the threat of death.
We really could think of flu, then, as just a bad cold.
Of course, the best vaccine imaginable is only valuable to the extent we get it to everyone who needs it.
So to do that, we have to combine smart vaccine design with smart production methods and, of course, smart delivery methods.
So I want you to think back a few months ago.
In June, the World Health Organization declared the first global flu pandemic in 41 years.
The U.S. government promised 150 million doses of vaccine by October 15th for the flu peak.
Vaccines were promised to developing countries.
Hundreds of millions of dollars were spent and flowed to accelerating vaccine manufacturing.
So what happened?
Well, we first figured out how to make flu vaccines, how to produce them, in the early 1940s.
It was a slow, cumbersome process that depended on chicken eggs, millions of living chicken eggs.
Viruses only grow in living things, and so it turned out that, for flu, chicken eggs worked really well.
For most strains, you could get one to two doses of vaccine per egg.
Luckily for us, we live in an era of breathtaking biomedical advances.
So today, we get our flu vaccines from ...
chicken eggs, (Laughter) hundreds of millions of chicken eggs.
Almost nothing has changed.
The system is reliable but the problem is you never know how well a strain is going to grow.
This year's swine flu strain grew very poorly in early production: basically .6 doses per egg.
So, here's an alarming thought.
What if that wild bird flies by again?
You could see an avian strain that would infect the poultry flocks, and then we would have no eggs for our vaccines.
So, Dan [Barber], if you want billions of chicken pellets for your fish farm, I know where to get them.
So right now, the world can produce about 350 million doses of flu vaccine for the three strains, and we can up that to about 1.2 billion doses if we want to target a single variant like swine flu.
But this assumes that our factories are humming because, in 2004, the U.S. supply was cut in half by contamination at one single plant.
And the process still takes more than half a year.
So are we better prepared than we were in 1918?
Well, with the new technologies emerging now, I hope we can say definitively, "Yes."
Imagine we could produce enough flu vaccine for everyone in the entire world for less than half of what we're currently spending now in the United States.
With a range of new technologies, we could.
Here's an example: A company I'm engaged with has found a specific piece of the H spike of flu that sparks the immune system.
If you lop this off and attach it to the tail of a different bacterium, which creates a vigorous immune response, they've created a very powerful flu fighter.
This vaccine is so small it can be grown in a common bacteria, E. coli.
Now, as you know, bacteria reproduce quickly -- it's like making yogurt -- and so we could produce enough swine origin flu for the entire world in a few factories, in a few weeks, with no eggs, for a fraction of the cost of current methods.
(Applause) So here's a comparison of several of these new vaccine technologies.
And, aside from the radically increased production and huge cost savings -- for example, the E. coli method I just talked about -- look at the time saved: this would be lives saved.
The developing world, mostly left out of the current response, sees the potential of these alternate technologies and they're leapfrogging the West.
India, Mexico and others are already making experimental flu vaccines, and they may be the first place we see these vaccines in use.
Because these technologies are so efficient and relatively cheap, billions of people can have access to lifesaving vaccines if we can figure out how to deliver them.
Now think of where this leads us.
New infectious diseases appear or reappear every few years.
Some day, perhaps soon, we'll have a virus that is going to threaten all of us.
Will we be quick enough to react before millions die?
Luckily, this year's flu was relatively mild.
I say, "luckily" in part because virtually no one in the developing world was vaccinated.
So if we have the political and financial foresight to sustain our investments, we will master these and new tools of vaccinology, and with these tools we can produce enough vaccine for everyone at low cost and ensure healthy productive lives.
No longer must flu have to kill half a million people a year.
No longer does AIDS need to kill two million a year.
No longer do the poor and vulnerable need to be threatened by infectious diseases, or indeed, anybody.
Instead of having Vaclav Smil's "massively fatal discontinuity" of life, we can ensure the continuity of life.
What the world needs now are these new vaccines, and we can make it happen.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
So, the science is changing.
In your mind, Seth -- I mean, you must dream about this -- what is the kind of time scale on, let's start with HIV, for a game-changing vaccine that's actually out there and usable?
SB: The game change can come at any time, because the problem we have now is we've shown we can get a vaccine to work in humans; we just need a better one.
And with these types of antibodies, we know humans can make them.
So, if we can figure out how to do that, then we have the vaccine, and what's interesting is there already is some evidence that we're beginning to crack that problem.
So, the challenge is full speed ahead.
CA: In your gut, do you think it's probably going to be at least another five years?
SB: You know, everybody says it's 10 years, but it's been 10 years every 10 years.
So I hate to put a timeline on scientific innovation, but the investments that have occurred are now paying dividends.
CA: And that's the same with universal flu vaccine, the same kind of thing?
SB: I think flu is different. I think what happened with flu is we've got a bunch -- I just showed some of this -- a bunch of really cool and useful technologies that are ready to go now.
They look good. The problem has been that, what we did is we invested in traditional technologies because that's what we were comfortable with.
You also can use adjuvants, which are chemicals you mix.
That's what Europe is doing, so we could have diluted out our supply of flu and made more available, but, going back to what Michael Specter said, the anti-vaccine crowd didn't really want that to happen.
CA: And malaria's even further behind?
SB: No, malaria, there is a candidate that actually showed efficacy in an earlier trial and is currently in phase three trials now.
It probably isn't the perfect vaccine, but it's moving along.
CA: Seth, most of us do work where every month, we produce something; we get that kind of gratification.
You've been slaving away at this for more than a decade, and I salute you and your colleagues for what you do.
The world needs people like you. Thank you.
SB: Thank you.
(Applause)
You know, when Chris first approached me to speak at TED, I said no, because I felt like I wasn't going to be able to make that personal connection, you know, that I wanted to.
It's such a large conference.
But he explained to me that he was in a bind, and that he was having trouble finding the kind of sex appeal and star power that the conference was known for.
So I said fine, Ted -- I mean Chris.
I'll come on two conditions.
One: I want to speak as early in the morning as possible.
And two: I want to pick the theme for TED 2006.
And luckily he agreed.
And the theme, in two years, is going to be "Cute Pictures Of Puppies."
(Video) (Music) [How to Dance Properly BASIC TWIRL] [NEW SCHOOL] [OLD SCHOOL] [WHO'S YOUR DADDY?] ["RIDE THE PONY"] [MAKE LOVE TO THE CROWD] [SMACKING THAT ASS] [STIR THE POT OF LOVE] [HANGING OUT ... CASUAL] [WORD.] (Applause) I invented the Placebo Camera.
(Laughter) It doesn't actually take pictures, but it's a hell of a lot cheaper, and you still feel like you were there.
(Laughter) (Clears his throat) (Laughter) "Dear Sir, good day, compliments of the day, and my best wishes to you and family.
(Breathes in) I know this letter will come to you surprisingly, but let it not be a surprise to you, for nature has a way of arriving unannounced, and, as an adage says, originals are very hard to find, but their echoes sound ouder.
So I decided to contact you myself, for you to assure me of safety and honesty, if I have to entrust any amount of money under your custody.
I am Mr Micheal Bangura, the son of late Mr Thaimu Bangura who was the Minister of Finance in Sierra Leone but was killed during the civil war.
(Laughter) Knowing your country to be economical conducive for investment, and your people as transparent and trustworthy to engage in business, on which premise I write you.
(Laughter) Before my father death, he had the sum of 23 million United States dollars, which he kept away from the rebel leaders during the course of the war.
(Laughter) This fund was supposed to be used for the rehabilitation of water reserves all over the country, before the outbreak of war.
When the war broke out, the rebel leader demanded the fund be given to him, my father insisted it was not in his possession, and he was killed because of his refusal to release the fund.
Meanwhile, my mother and I is the only person who knows about it because my father always confide in me.
(Sighs) I made an arrangement with a Red Cross relief worker, who used his official van to transport the money to Lungi Airport, Freetown, although he did not know the real contents of the box.
(Laughter) The fund was deposited as a family reasure, in a safe, reliable security company in Dakar, Senegal, where I was only given temporary asylum.
I do not wish to invest the money in Senegal due to unfavorable economic climate, and so close to my country.
The only assistance I need from you, which I know you would do for me, are the following: one, be a silent partner and receive the funds in your account in trust; two, provide a bank account under your control to which the funds will be remitted; three, receive the funds into your account in trust; take out your commission; and leave the rest of the money until I arrive, after the transfer is complete.
Sincerely, Mr Micheal Bangura."
(Laughter) (Applause) This is really embarrassing.
I was told backstage that I have 18 minutes.
I only prepared 15.
(Laughter) So if it's cool, I'd like to just wait for three.
(Laughter) (Laughter ends) I'm really sorry.
(Laughter) (Applause) What's your name?
(Laughter) Mark Surfas.
It's pretty cool, huh? Pursuing happiness.
(Laughter) Are you a virgin? Virgin?
I mean -- no, I mean like in the TED sense?
(Laughter) Are you? Oh, yeah?
So what are you, like, a thousand, two thousand, somewhere in there?
Huh? Oh?
You don't know what I'm talking about?
(Laughter) Ah, Mark -- (Laughter) Surfas.
(Laughter) 1,860 -- am I good?
And that's nothing to be ashamed of.
That's nothing to be ashamed of.
(Applause) Yeah, I was hanging out with some Google guys last night.
Really cool, we were getting wasted.
(Laughter) And they were telling me that Google software has gotten so advanced that, based on your interaction with Google over your lifetime, they can actually predict what you are going to say -- (Laughter) next.
And I was like, "Get the fuck out of here. That's crazy."
(Laughter) But they said, "No, but don't show anyone."
But they slipped up.
And they said that I could just type in "What was I going to say next?"
and my name, and it would tell me.
And I have to tell you, this is an unadulterated piece of software, this is a real Internet browser and this is the actual Google site, and we're going to test it out live today.
What was I going to say next?
And "Ze Frank" -- that's me.
Am I feeling lucky?
(Laughter) (Shouting) Am I feeling lucky?
Audience: Yes! Yeah!
(Sighs) (Laughter) Ze Frank: Oh! Amazing.
(Laughter) In March of 2001 -- (Laughter) I filmed myself dancing to Madonna's "Justify My Love."
On a Thursday, I sent out a link to a website that featured those clips to 17 of my closest friends, as part of an invitation to my -- an invitation to my th -- th -- 26th birthday party.
(Laughter) (Clears throat) By Monday, over a million people were coming to this site a day.
(Sighs) (Laughter) Within a week, I received a call from Earthlink that said, due to a 10 cents per megabyte overage charge, I owed them 30,000 dollars.
(Laughter) Needless to say, I was able to leave my job.
[WAS LAID OFF] (Laughter) And, finally, you know, become freelance.
(Laughter) [UNEMPLOYED] But some people refer to me more as, like, an Internet guru or -- [JACKASS] swami.
(Laughter) I knew I had something.
I'd basically distilled a very difficult-to-explain and complex philosophy, which I won't get into here, because it's a little too deep for all of you, but -- (Laughter) It's about what makes websites popular, and, you know, it's -- [DANCE LIKE AN IDIOT AND DON'T SELL ANYTHING] It's unfortunate that I don't have more time.
Maybe I can come back next year, or something like that.
(Laughter) I'm obsessed with email. I get a lot of it.
Four years later, I still get probably two or three hundred emails a day from people I don't know, and it's been an amazing opportunity to kind of get to know different cultures, you know?
It's like a microscope to the rest of the world.
You can kind of peer into other people's lives.
And I also feel like I get a lot of inspiration from the average user.
For example, somebody wrote, "Hey Ze, if you ever come to Boulder, you should rock out with us," and I said, "Why wait?"
[rocking out] (Video) (Music) And they said, "Hey Ze, thanks for rocking out, but I meant the kind of rocking out where we'd be naked."
(Laughter) And that was embarrassing.
But you know, it's kind of a collaboration between me and the fans, so I said, "Sure."
[rocking out naked] (Video) (Music) (Laughter) I hear a lot of you whispering.
(Laughter) And I know what you're saying, "Holy crap!
How is his presentation so smooth?"
(Laughter) And I have to say that it's not all me this year.
I guess Chris has to take some credit here, because in years past, I guess there's been some sort of subpar speakers at TED.
I don't know.
And so, this year, Chris sent us a TED conference simulator.
(Laughter) Which really allowed us as speakers to get there, in the trenches, and practice at home so that we would be ready for this experience.
And I've got to say that, you know, it's really, really great to be here.
(Pre-recorded applause) I'd like to tell all of you a little joke.
(Pre-recorded applause and cheering) Not just the good stuff, though.
You can do heckler mode.
Voice: Hey, moron, get off the stage!
ZF: You get off the stage.
(Laughter) Voice: We want Malcolm Gladwell.
(Laughter) (Baby cooing) (Huge crowd applauding) In case you run over time.
(Heroic music) Just one last thing I'd like to say, I'd, really -- (Laughter) I'd like to thank all of you for being here.
(Loud music) (Laughter) And frog mode.
(Singing) (Sings) "Ah, the first time that I made love to a rock shrimp --" (Laughter) [Spam jokes are the new airplane jokes] (Sighs) It's true.
Some people say to me, "Ze, you're doing all this stuff, this Internet stuff, and you're not making any money."
(Laughter) "Why?" And I say, "Mom, Dad -- (Laughter) I'm trying."
I don't know if you're all aware of this, but the video game market, kids are playing these video games, but, supposedly, there's tons of money.
I mean, like, I think, 100,000 dollars or so a year is being spent on these things.
So I decided to try my hand.
I came up with a few games.
(Laughter) This is called "Atheist."
I figured it would be popular with the young kids.
OK.
Look, I'll move around and say some things.
(Sighs) [Game over. There is no replay.] (Laughter) So that didn't go over so well.
(Laughter) I don't really understand why you're laughing.
(Laughter) Should have done this before I tried to pitch it.
"Buddhist," of course, looks very, very similar to "Atheist."
(Laughter) But you come back as a duck.
(Laughter) And this is great because, you know, for a quarter, you can play this for a long time.
(Laughter) And Chris had said in an email that we should really bring something new to TED, something that we haven't shown anyone.
So, I made this for TED. It's "Christian."
It's the third in the series.
I'm hoping it's going to do well this year.
(Sighs) (Laughter) Do you have a preference?
(Laughter) Good choice.
(Laughter) So you can wait for the Second Coming, which is a random number between one and 500 million.
(Laughter) So really, what are we talking about here?
Oh, tech joy.
(Laughter) Tech joy, to me, means something, because I get a lot of joy out of tech.
And in fact, making things using technology -- and I'm being serious here, even though I'm using my sarcastic voice -- I won't -- hold on.
Making things, you know -- making things actually does give me a lot of joy.
It's the process of creation that keeps me sort of a bubble and a half above perpetual anxiety in my life, and it's that feeling of being about 80 percent complete on a project -- where you know you still have something to do, but it's not finished, and you're not starting something -- that really fills my entire life.
And so, what I've done is, I started getting interested in creating online social spaces to share that feeling with people who don't consider themselves artists.
We're in a culture of guru-ship.
It's so hard to use some software because, you know, it's unapproachable, people feel like they have to read the manual.
So I try to create these very minimal activities that allow people to express themselves, and, hopefully -- ("The End" by The Doors) Whoa! I'm like -- on the page, but it doesn't exist.
(Laughter) It's, like -- seriously, though -- (Laughter) I try to create meaningful environments for people to express themselves.
(Laughter) Here I created a contest called, "When Office Supplies Attack," which, I think, really resonated with the working population.
(Laughter) Over 500 entries in three weeks.
Toilet paper fashion.
(Laughter) Again, people from all over the country.
The watch is particularly incredible.
(Laughter) Online drawing tools -- you've probably seen a lot of them.
I think they're wonderful.
It's a chance for people to get to play with crayons and all that kind of stuff.
But I'm interested in the process of creating, as the real event that I'm interested in.
And the problem is that a lot of people suck at drawing, and they get bummed out at this, sort of, you know, stick figure, awful little thing that they created.
And eventually, it just makes them stop playing with it, or they draw penises and things like that.
(Laughter) So, the Scribbler is an attempt to create a generative tool.
In other words, it's a helping tool.
You can draw your simple stick figure, and it collaborates with you to create sort of a post-war German etching.
(Laughter) In fact, it's tuned to be better at drawing things that look worse.
So, we go ahead, and we start scribbling.
So the idea is that you can really, you know, partake in this process, but watch something really crappy look beautiful.
And here are some of my favorites.
This is the little trap marionette that was submitted to me.
Very cool.
(Laughter) Darling.
Beautiful stuff.
I mean this is incredible.
An 11-year-old girl drew this and submitted it.
It's just gorgeous.
(Laughter) I'm dead serious here.
This is not a joke.
(Laughter) But, I think it's a really fun and wonderful thing.
So this is called the "Fiction Project."
This is an online space, which is basically a refurbished message board that encourages collaborative fiction writing.
These are haikus.
None of the haikus were written by the same person.
In fact, each line is contributed by a different person at a different time.
I think that the "now tied up, tied down, mistress cruel approaches me, now tied down, it's up."
It's an amazing way, and I'll tell you, if you come home, and your spouse, or whoever it is, says, "Let's talk" -- That, like, chills you to the very core.
(Laughter) But it's peripheral activities like these that allow people to get together, doing fun things.
They actually get to know each other, and it's sort of like low-threshold peripheral activities that I think are the key to bringing up some of our bonding social capital that we're lacking.
And very, very quickly -- I love puppets.
Here's a puppet.
It dances to music.
Lotte Reiniger, an amazing shadow puppeteer in the 20s, that started doing more elaborate things.
I became interested in puppets, and I just want to show one last thing to you.
Oh, this is how you make puppets.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Ze Frank.
(Applause)
I want to talk about what we learn from conservatives.
And I'm at a stage in life where I'm yearning for my old days, so I want to confess to you that when I was a kid, indeed, I was a conservative.
I was a Young Republican, a Teenage Republican, a leader in the Teenage Republicans.
Indeed, I was the youngest member of any delegation in the 1980 convention that elected Ronald Reagan to be the Republican nominee for president.
Now, I know what you're thinking.
(Laughter) You're thinking, "That's not what the Internets say."
You're thinking, "Wikipedia doesn't say this fact."
And indeed, this is just one of the examples of the junk that flows across the tubes in these Internets here.
Wikipedia reports that this guy, this former congressman from Erie, Pennsylvania was, at the age of 20, one of the youngest people at the Republican National Convention, but it's just not true.
(Laughter) Indeed, it drives me so nuts, let me just change this little fact here.
(Laughter) (Applause) All right. Okay, so ... perfect.
Perfect.
(Laughter) Okay, speaker Lawrence Lessig, right.
Okay.
Finally, truth will be brought here.
Okay, see? It's done. It's almost done. Here we go.
"... Youngest Republican," okay, we're finished.
That's it. Please save this.
Great, here we go.
And ... Wikipedia is fixed, finally.
Okay, but no, this is really besides the point.
(Applause) But the thing I want you to think about when we think about conservatives -- not so much this issue of the 1980 convention -- the thing to think about is this: They go to church.
Now, you know, I mean, a lot of people go to church.
I'm not talking about that only conservatives go to church.
And I'm not talking about the God thing.
I don't want to get into that, you know; that's not my point.
They go to church, by which I mean, they do lots of things for free for each other.
They hold potluck dinners.
Indeed, they sell books about potluck dinners.
They serve food to poor people.
They share, they give, they give away for free.
And it's the very same people leading Wall Street firms who, on Sundays, show up and share.
And not only food, right.
These very same people are strong believers, in lots of contexts, in the limits on the markets.
They are in many important places against markets.
Indeed, they, like all of us, celebrate this kind of relationship.
But they're very keen that we don't let money drop into that relationship, else it turns into something like this.
They want to regulate us, those conservatives, to stop us from allowing the market to spread in those places.
Because they understand: There are places for the market and places where the market should not exist, where we should be free to enjoy the fellowship of others.
They recognize: Both of these things have to live together.
And the second great thing about conservatives: they get ecology.
Right, it was the first great Republican president of the 20th century who taught us about environmental thinking -- Teddy Roosevelt.
They first taught us about ecology in the context of natural resources.
And then they began to teach us in the context of innovation, economics.
They understand, in that context, "free." They understand "free" is an important essential part of the cultural ecology as well.
That's the thing I want you to think about them.
Now, I know you don't believe me, really, here.
So here's exhibit number one.
I want to share with you my latest hero, Julian Sanchez, a libertarian who works at the, for many people, "evil" Cato Institute.
Okay, so Julian made this video.
He's a terrible producer of videos, but it's great content, so I'm going to give you a little bit of it.
So here he is beginning.
Julian Sanchez: I'm going to make an observation about the way remix culture seems to be evolving ...
Larry Lessig: So what he does is he begins to tell us about these three videos.
This is this fantastic Brat Pack remix set to Lisztomania.
Which, of course, spread virally.
Hugely successful.
(Music) And then some people from Brooklyn saw it.
They decided they wanted to do the same.
(Music) And then, of course, people from San Fransisco saw it.
And San Franciscans thought they had to do the same as well.
(Music) And so they're beautiful, but this libertarian has some important lessons he wants us to learn from this.
Here's lesson number one.
JS: There's obviously also something really deeply great about this.
They are acting in the sense that they're emulating the original mashup.
And the guy who shot it obviously has a strong eye and some experience with video editing.
But this is also basically just a group of friends having an authentic social moment and screwing around together.
It should feel familiar and kind of resonate for anyone who's had a sing-a-long or a dance party with a group of good friends.
LL: Or ...
JS: So that's importantly different from the earlier videos we looked at because here, remix isn't just about an individual doing something alone in his basement; it becomes an act of social creativity.
And it's not just that it yields a different kind of product at the end, it's that potentially it changes the way that we relate to each other.
All of our normal social interactions become a kind of invitation to this sort of collective expression.
It's our real social lives themselves that are transmuted into art.
LL: And so then, what this libertarian draws from these two points ...
JS: One remix is about individuals using our shared culture as a kind of language to communicate something to an audience.
Stage two, social remix, is really about using it to mediate people's relationships to each other.
First, within each video, the Brat Pack characters are used as a kind of template for performing the social reality of each group.
But there's also a dialogue between the videos, where, once the basic structure is established, it becomes a kind of platform for articulating the similarities and differences between the groups' social and physical worlds.
LL: And then, here's for me, the critical key to what Julian has to say ...
JS: Copyright policy isn't just about how to incentivize the production of a certain kind of artistic commodity; it's about what level of control we're going to permit to be exercised over our social realities -- social realities that are now inevitably permeated by pop culture.
I think it's important that we keep these two different kinds of public goods in mind.
If we're only focused on how to maximize the supply of one, I think we risk suppressing this different and richer and, in some ways, maybe even more important one.
LL: Right. Bingo. Point.
Freedom needs this opportunity to both have the commercial success of the great commercial works and the opportunity to build this different kind of culture.
And for that to happen, you need ideas like fair use to be central and protected, to enable this kind of innovation, as this libertarian tells us, between these two creative cultures, a commercial and a sharing culture.
The point is they, he, here, gets that culture.
Now, my concern is, we Dems, too often, not so much.
All right, take for example this great company.
In the good old days when this Republican ran that company, their greatest work was work that built on the past, right.
All of the great Disney works were works that took works that were in the public domain and remixed them, or waited until they entered the public domain to remix them, to celebrate this add-on remix creativity.
Indeed, Mickey Mouse himself, of course, as "Steamboat Willie," is a remix of the then, very dominant, very popular "Steamboat Bill" by Buster Keaton.
This man was a remixer extraordinaire.
He is the celebration and ideal of exactly this kind of creativity.
But then the company passes through this dark stage to this Democrat.
Wildly different.
This is the mastermind behind the eventual passage of what we call the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, extending the term of existing copyrights by 20 years, so that no one could do to Disney what Disney did to the Brothers Grimm.
Now, when we tried to challenge this, going to the Supreme Court, getting the Supreme Court, the bunch of conservatives there -- if we could get them to wake up to this -- to strike it down, we had the assistance of Nobel Prize winners including this right-wing Nobel Prize winner, Milton Friedman, who said he would join our brief only if the word "no brainer" was in the brief somewhere.
(Laughter) But apparently, no brains existed in this place when Democrats passed and signed this bill into law.
Now, tiny little quibble of a footnote: Sonny Bono, you might say, was a Republican, but I don't buy it.
This guy is no Republican.
Okay, for a second example, think about this cultural hero, icon on the Left, creator of this character.
Look at the site that he built: "Star Wars" MashUps, inviting people to come and use their creative energy to produce a new generation of attention towards this extraordinarily important cultural icon.
Read the license.
The license for these remixers assigns all of the rights to the remix back to Lucas.
The mashup is owned by Lucas.
Indeed, anything you add to the mashup, music you might add, Lucas has a worldwide perpetual right to exploit that for free.
There is no creator here to be recognized.
The creator doesn't have any rights.
The creator is a sharecropper in this story.
And we should remember who employed the sharecroppers: the Democrats, right?
So the point is the Republicans here recognize that there's a certain need of ownership, a respect for ownership, the respect we should give the creator, the remixer, the owner, the property owner, the copyright owner of this extraordinarily powerful stuff, and not a generation of sharecroppers.
Now, I think there are lessons we should learn here, lessons about openness.
Our lives are sharing activities, at least in part.
Even for the head of Goldman Sachs, at least in part.
And for that sharing activity to happen, we have to have well-protected spaces of fair use.
That's number one. Number two: This ecology of sharing needs freedom within which to create.
Freedom, which means without permission from anyone, the ability to create.
And number three: We need to respect the creator, the creator of these remixes through rights that are directly tied to them.
Now, this explains the right-wing nonprofit Creative Commons.
Actually, it's not a right-wing nonprofit, but of course -- let me just tie it here -- the Creative Commons, which is offering authors this simple way to mark their content with the freedoms they intended to carry.
So that we go from a "all rights reserved" world to a "some rights reserved" world so that people can know the freedoms they have attached to the content, building and creating on the basis of this creative copyrighted work.
These tools that we built enable this sharing in parts through licenses that make it clear and a freedom to create without requiring permission first because the permission has already been granted and a respect for the creator because it builds upon a copyright the creator has licensed freely.
And it explains the vast right-wing conspiracy that's obviously developed around these licenses, as now more than 350 million digital objects are out there, licensed freely in this way.
Now that picture of an ecology of creativity, the picture of an ecology of balanced creativity, is that the ecology of creativity we have right now?
Well, as you all know, not many of us believe we do.
I tripped on the reality of this ecology of creativity just last week.
I created a video which was based on a Wireside Chat that I'd given, and I uploaded it to YouTube.
I then got this email from YouTube weirdly notifying me that there was content in that owned by the mysterious WMG that matched their content ID.
So I didn't think much about it.
And then on Twitter, somebody said to me, "Your talk on YouTube was DMCA'd. Was that your purpose?"
imagining that I had this deep conspiracy to reveal the obvious flaws in the DMCA.
I answered, "No." I didn't even think about it.
But then I went to the site and all of the audio in my site had been silenced.
My whole 45-minute video had been silenced because there were snippets in that video, a video about fair use, that included Warner Music Group music.
Now, interestingly, they still sold ads for that music, if you played the silent video.
You could still buy the music, but you couldn't hear anything because it had been silenced.
So I did what the current regime says I must do to be free to use YouTube to talk about fair use.
I went to this site, and I had to answer these questions.
And then in an extraordinarily Bart Simpson-like, juvenile way you've actually got to type out these words and get them right to reassert your freedom to speak.
And I felt like I was in third grade again.
"I will not put tacks on the teacher's chair.
I will not put tacks on the teacher's chair."
This is absurd.
It is outrageous.
It is an extraordinary perversion of the system of freedom we should be encouraging.
And the question I ask you is: Who's fighting it?
Well, interestingly, in the last presidential election, who was the number one, active opponent of this system of regulation in online speech?
John McCain.
Letter after letter attacking YouTube's refusal to be more respectful of fair use with their extraordinary notice and take down system, that led his campaign so many times to be thrown off the Internet.
Now, that was the story of me then, my good old days of right-wing lunacy.
Let me come back to now, now when I'm a little leftist -- I'm certainly left-handed, so at least a lefty -- And I wonder, can we on the Left expect to build this ecology of freedom, now, in a world where we know the extraordinarily powerful influences against it, where even icons of the Left like this entertain and push bills that would effectively ban the requirement of open access for government-funded research?
The president, who has supported a process that secretly negotiates agreements, which effectively lock us into the insane system of DMCA that we have adopted and likely lock us down a path of three strikes, you're out that, of course, the rest of the world are increasingly adopting.
Not a single example of reform has been produced yet.
And we're not going to see this change in this system anytime soon.
So here's the lessons of openness that I think we need to learn.
Openness is a commitment to a certain set of values.
We need to speak of those values.
The value of freedom. It's a value of community.
It's a value of the limits in regulation.
It's a value respecting the creator.
Now, if we can learn those values from at least some influences on the Right, if we can take them and incorporate them, maybe we could do a little trade.
We learn those values on the Left, and maybe they'll do health care or global warming legislation or something in the Right.
Anyway, please join me in teaching these values.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
We're 25, 26 years after the advent of the Macintosh, which was an astoundingly seminal event in the history of human-machine interface and in computation in general.
It fundamentally changed the way that people thought about computation, thought about computers, how they used them and who and how many people were able to use them.
It was such a radical change, in fact, that the early Macintosh development team in '82, '83, '84 had to write an entirely new operating system from the ground up.
Now, this is an interesting little message, and it's a lesson that has since, I think, been forgotten or lost or something, and that is, namely, that the OS is the interface.
The interface is the OS.
It's like the land and the king (i.e. Arthur) they're inseparable, they are one.
And to write a new operating system was not a capricious matter.
It wasn't just a matter of tuning up some graphics routines.
There were no graphics routines. There were no mouse drivers.
So it was a necessity.
But in the quarter-century since then, we've seen all of the fundamental supporting technologies go berserk.
So memory capacity and disk capacity have been multiplied by something between 10,000 and a million.
Same thing for processor speeds.
Networks, we didn't have networks at all at the time of the Macintosh's introduction, and that has become the single most salient aspect of how we live with computers.
And, of course, graphics: Today 84 dollars and 97 cents at Best Buy buys you more graphics power than you could have gotten for a million bucks from SGI only a decade ago.
So we've got that incredible ramp-up.
Then, on the side, we've got the Web and, increasingly, the cloud, which is fantastic, but also -- in the regard in which an interface is fundamental -- kind of a distraction.
So we've forgotten to invent new interfaces.
Certainly we've seen in recent years a lot of change in that regard, and people are starting to wake up about that.
So what happens next? Where do we go from there?
The problem, as we see it, has to do with a single, simple word: "space," or a single, simple phrase: "real world geometry."
Computers and the programming languages that we talk to them in, that we teach them in, are hideously insensate when it comes to space.
They don't understand real world space.
It's a funny thing because the rest of us occupy it quite frequently and quite well.
They also don't understand time, but that's a matter for a separate talk.
So what happens if you start to explain space to them?
One thing you might get is something like the Luminous Room.
The Luminous Room is a system in which it's considered that input and output spaces are co-located.
That's a strangely simple, and yet unexplored idea, right?
When you use a mouse, your hand is down here on the mouse pad.
It's not even on the same plane as what you're talking about: The pixels are up on the display.
So here was a room in which all the walls, floors, ceilings, pets, potted plants, whatever was in there, were capable, not only of display but of sensing as well.
And that means input and output are in the same space enabling stuff like this.
That's a digital storage in a physical container.
The contract is the same as with real word objects in real world containers.
Has to come back out, whatever you put in.
This little design experiment that was a small office here knew a few other tricks as well.
If you presented it with a chess board, it tried to figure out what you might mean by that.
And if there was nothing for them to do, the chess pieces eventually got bored and hopped away.
The academics who were overseeing this work thought that that was too frivolous, so we built deadly serious applications like this optics prototyping workbench in which a toothpaste cap on a cardboard box becomes a laser.
The beam splitters and lenses are represented by physical objects, and the system projects down the laser beam path.
So you've got an interface that has no interface.
You operate the world as you operate the real world, which is to say, with your hands.
Similarly, a digital wind tunnel with digital wind flowing from right to left -- not that remarkable in a sense; we didn't invent the mathematics.
But if you displayed that on a CRT or flat panel display, it would be meaningless to hold up an arbitrary object, a real world object in that.
Here, the real world merges with the simulation.
And finally, to pull out all the stops, this is a system called Urp, for urban planners, in which we give architects and urban planners back the models that we confiscated when we insisted that they use CAD systems.
And we make the machine meet them half way.
It projects down digital shadows, as you see here.
And if you introduce tools like this inverse clock, then you can control the sun's position in the sky.
That's 8 a.m. shadows.
They get a little shorter at 9 a.m.
There you are, swinging the sun around.
Short shadows at noon and so forth.
And we built up a series of tools like this.
There are inter-shadowing studies that children can operate, even though they don't know anything about urban planning: To move a building, you simply reach out your hand and you move the building.
A material wand makes the building into a sort of Frank Gehry thing that reflects light in all directions.
Are you blinding passers by and motorists on the freeways?
A zoning tool connects distant structures, a building and a roadway.
Are you going to get sued by the zoning commission? And so forth.
Now, if these ideas seem familiar or perhaps even a little dated, that's great; they should seem familiar.
This work is 15 years old.
This stuff was undertaken at MIT and the Media Lab under the incredible direction of Professor Hiroshi Ishii, director of the Tangible Media Group.
But it was that work that was seen by Alex McDowell, one of the world's legendary production designers.
But Alex was preparing a little, sort of obscure, indie, arthouse film called "Minority Report" for Steven Spielberg, and invited us to come out from MIT and design the interfaces that would appear in that film.
And the great thing about it was that Alex was so dedicated to the idea of verisimilitude, the idea that the putative 2054 that we were painting in the film be believable, that he allowed us to take on that design work as if it were an R&amp;D effort.
And the result is sort of gratifyingly perpetual.
People still reference those sequences in "Minority Report" when they talk about new UI design.
So this led full circle, in a strange way, to build these ideas into what we believe is the necessary future of human machine interface: the Spatial Operating Environment, we call it.
So here we have a bunch of stuff, some images.
And, using a hand, we can actually exercise six degrees of freedom, six degrees of navigational control.
And it's fun to fly through Mr. Beckett's eye.
And you can come back out through the scary orangutan.
And that's all well and good.
Let's do something a little more difficult.
Here, we have a whole bunch of disparate images.
We can fly around them.
So navigation is a fundamental issue.
You have to be able to navigate in 3D.
Much of what we want computers to help us with in the first place is inherently spatial.
And the part that isn't spatial can often be spatialized to allow our wetware to make greater sense of it.
Now we can distribute this stuff in many different ways.
So we can throw it out like that. Let's reset it.
We can organize it this way.
And, of course, it's not just about navigation, but about manipulation as well.
So if we don't like stuff, or we're intensely curious about Ernst Haeckel's scientific falsifications, we can pull them out like that.
And then if it's time for analysis, we can pull back a little bit and ask for a different distribution.
Let's just come down a bit and fly around.
So that's a different way to look at stuff.
If you're of a more analytical nature then you might want, actually, to look at this as a color histogram.
So now we've got the stuff color-sorted, angle maps onto color.
And now, if we want to select stuff, 3D, space, the idea that we're tracking hands in real space becomes really important because we can reach in, not in 2D, not in fake 2D, but in actual 3D.
Here are some selection planes.
And we'll perform this Boolean operation because we really love yellow and tapirs on green grass.
So, from there to the world of real work.
Here's a logistics system, a small piece of one that we're currently building.
There're a lot of elements.
And one thing that's very important is to combine traditional tabular data with three-dimensional and geospatial information.
So here's a familiar place.
And we'll bring this back here for a second.
Maybe select a little bit of that.
And bring out this graph.
And we should, now, be able to fly in here and have a closer look.
These are logistics elements that are scattered across the United States.
One thing that three-dimensional interactions and the general idea of imbuing computation with space affords you is a final destruction of that unfortunate one-to-one pairing between human beings and computers.
That's the old way, that's the old mantra: one machine, one human, one mouse, one screen.
Well, that doesn't really cut it anymore.
In the real world, we have people who collaborate; we have people who have to work together, and we have many different displays.
And we might want to look at these various images.
We might want to ask for some help.
The author of this new pointing device is sitting over there, so I can pull this from there to there.
These are unrelated machines, right?
So the computation is space soluble and network soluble.
So I'm going to leave that over there because I have a question for Paul.
Paul is the designer of this wand, and maybe its easiest for him to come over here and tell me in person what's going on.
So let me get some of these out of the way.
Let's pull this apart: I'll go ahead and explode it.
Kevin, can you help?
Let me see if I can help us find the circuit board.
Mind you, it's a sort of gratuitous field-stripping exercise, but we do it in the lab all the time.
All right.
So collaborative work, whether it's immediately co-located or distant and distinct, is always important.
And again, that stuff needs to be undertaken in the context of space.
And finally, I'd like to leave you with a glimpse that takes us back to the world of imagery.
This is a system called TAMPER, which is a slightly whimsical look at what the future of editing and media manipulation systems might be.
We at Oblong believe that media should be accessible in much more fine-grained form.
So we have a large number of movies stuck inside here.
And let's just pick out a few elements.
We can zip through them as a possibility.
We can grab elements off the front, where upon they reanimate, come to life, and drag them down onto the table here.
We'll go over to Jacques Tati here and grab our blue friend and put him down on the table as well.
We may need more than one.
And we probably need, well, we probably need a cowboy to be quite honest.
(Laughter) Yeah, let's take that one.
(Laughter) You see, cowboys and French farce people don't go well together, and the system knows that.
Let me leave with one final thought, and that is that one of the greatest English language writers of the last three decades suggested that great art is always a gift.
And he wasn't talking about whether the novel costs 24.95 [dollars], or whether you have to spring 70 million bucks to buy the stolen Vermeer; he was talking about the circumstances of its creation and of its existence.
And I think that it's time that we asked for the same from technology.
Technology is capable of expressing and being imbued with a certain generosity, and we need to demand that, in fact.
For some of this kind of technology, ground center is a combination of design, which is crucially important.
We can't have advances in technology any longer unless design is integrated from the very start.
And, as well, as of efficacy, agency.
We're, as human beings, the creatures that create, and we should make sure that our machines aid us in that task and are built in that same image.
So I will leave you with that. Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So to ask the obvious question -- actually this is from Bill Gates -- when? (John Underkoffler: When?) CA: When real? When for us, not just in a lab and on a stage?
Can it be for every man, or is this just for corporations and movie producers?
JU: No, it has to be for every human being.
That's our goal entirely.
We won't have succeeded unless we take that next big step.
I mean it's been 25 years.
Can there really be only one interface? There can't.
CA: But does that mean that, at your desk or in your home, you need projectors, cameras?
You know, how can it work?
JU: No, this stuff will be built into the bezel of every display.
It'll be built into architecture.
The gloves go away in a matter of months or years.
So this is the inevitability about it.
CA: So, in your mind, five years time, someone can buy this as part of a standard computer interface?
JU: I think in five years time when you buy a computer, you'll get this.
CA: Well that's cool.
(Applause) The world has a habit of surprising us as to how these things are actually used.
What do you think, what in your mind is the first killer app for this?
JU: That's a good question, and we ask ourselves that every day.
At the moment, our early-adopter customers -- and these systems are deployed out in the real world -- do all the big data intensive, data heavy problems with it.
So, whether it's logistics and supply chain management or natural gas and resource extraction, financial services, pharmaceuticals, bioinformatics, those are the topics right now, but that's not a killer app.
And I understand what you're asking.
CA: C'mon, c'mon. Martial arts, games. C'mon.
(Laughter) John, thank you for making science-fiction real.
JU: It's been a great pleasure.
Thank you to you all.
(Applause)
I would like to share with you this morning some stories about the ocean through my work as a still photographer for National Geographic magazine.
I guess I became an underwater photographer and a photojournalist because I fell in love with the sea as a child.
And I wanted to tell stories about all the amazing things I was seeing underwater, incredible wildlife and interesting behaviors.
And after even 30 years of doing this, after 30 years of exploring the ocean, I never cease to be amazed at the extraordinary encounters that I have while I'm at sea.
But more and more frequently these days I'm seeing terrible things underwater as well, things that I don't think most people realize.
And I've been compelled to turn my camera towards these issues to tell a more complete story.
I want people to see what's happening underwater, both the horror and the magic.
The first story that I did for National Geographic, where I recognized the ability to include environmental issues within a natural history coverage, was a story I proposed on harp seals.
The story I wanted to do initially was just a small focus to look at the few weeks each year where these animals migrate down from the Canadian arctic to the Gulf of St. Lawrence in Canada to engage in courtship, mating and to have their pups.
And all of this is played out against the backdrop of transient pack ice that moves with wind and tide.
And because I'm an underwater photographer, I wanted to do this story from both above and below, to make pictures like this that show one of these little pups making its very first swim in the icy 29-degree water.
But as I got more involved in the story, I realized that there were two big environmental issues I couldn't ignore.
The first was that these animals continue to be hunted, killed with hakapiks at about eight, 15 days old.
It actually is the largest marine mammal slaughter on the planet, with hundreds of thousands of these seals being killed every year.
But as disturbing as that is, I think the bigger problem for harp seals is the loss of sea ice due to global warming.
This is an aerial picture that I made that shows the Gulf of St. Lawrence during harp seal season.
And even though we see a lot of ice in this picture, there's a lot of water as well, which wasn't there historically.
And the ice that is there is quite thin.
The problem is that these pups need a stable platform of solid ice in order to nurse from their moms.
They only need 12 days from the moment they're born until they're on their own.
But if they don't get 12 days, they can fall into the ocean and die.
This is a photo that I made showing one of these pups that's only about five or seven days old -- still has a little bit of the umbilical cord on its belly -- that has fallen in because of the thin ice, and the mother is frantically trying to push it up to breathe and to get it back to stable purchase.
This problem has continued to grow each year since I was there.
I read that last year the pup mortality rate was 100 percent in parts of the Gulf of St. Lawrence.
So, clearly, this species has a lot of problems going forward.
This ended up becoming a cover story at National Geographic.
And it received quite a bit of attention.
And with that, I saw the potential to begin doing other stories about ocean problems.
So I proposed a story on the global fish crisis, in part because I had personally witnessed a lot of degradation in the ocean over the last 30 years, but also because I read a scientific paper that stated that 90 percent of the big fish in the ocean have disappeared in the last 50 or 60 years.
These are the tuna, the billfish and the sharks.
When I read that, I was blown away by those numbers.
I thought this was going to be headline news in every media outlet, but it really wasn't, so I wanted to do a story that was a very different kind of underwater story.
I wanted it to be more like war photography, where I was making harder-hitting pictures that showed readers what was happening to marine wildlife around the planet.
The first component of the story that I thought was essential, however, was to give readers a sense of appreciation for the ocean animals that they were eating.
You know, I think people go into a restaurant, and somebody orders a steak, and we all know where steak comes from, and somebody orders a chicken, and we know what a chicken is, but when they're eating bluefin sushi, do they have any sense of the magnificent animal that they're consuming?
These are the lions and tigers of the sea.
In reality, these animals have no terrestrial counterpart; they're unique in the world.
These are animals that can practically swim from the equator to the poles and can crisscross entire oceans in the course of a year.
If we weren't so efficient at catching them, because they grow their entire life, would have 30-year-old bluefin out there that weigh a ton.
But the truth is we're way too efficient at catching them, and their stocks have collapsed worldwide.
This is the daily auction at the Tsukiji Fish Market that I photographed a couple years ago.
And every single day these tuna, bluefin like this, are stacked up like cordwood, just warehouse after warehouse.
As I wandered around and made these pictures, it sort of occurred to me that the ocean's not a grocery store, you know.
We can't keep taking without expecting serious consequences as a result.
I also, with the story, wanted to show readers how fish are caught, some of the methods that are used to catch fish, like a bottom trawler, which is one of the most common methods in the world.
This was a small net that was being used in Mexico to catch shrimp, but the way it works is essentially the same everywhere in the world.
You have a large net in the middle with two steel doors on either end.
And as this assembly is towed through the water, the doors meet resistance with the ocean, and it opens the mouth of the net, and they place floats at the top and a lead line on the bottom.
And this just drags over the bottom, in this case to catch shrimp.
But as you can imagine, it's catching everything else in its path as well.
And it's destroying that precious benthic community on the bottom, things like sponges and corals, that critical habitat for other animals.
This photograph I made of the fisherman holding the shrimp that he caught after towing his nets for one hour.
So he had a handful of shrimp, maybe seven or eight shrimp, and all those other animals on the deck of the boat are bycatch.
These are animals that died in the process, but have no commercial value.
So this is the true cost of a shrimp dinner, maybe seven or eight shrimp and 10 pounds of other animals that had to die in the process.
And to make that point even more visual, I swam under the shrimp boat and made this picture of the guy shoveling this bycatch into the sea as trash and photographed this cascade of death, you know, animals like guitarfish, bat rays, flounder, pufferfish, that only an hour before, were on the bottom of the ocean, alive, but now being thrown back as trash.
I also wanted to focus on the shark fishing industry because, currently on planet Earth, we're killing over 100 million sharks every single year.
But before I went out to photograph this component, I sort of wrestled with the notion of how do you make a picture of a dead shark that will resonate with readers You know, I think there's still a lot of people out there who think the only good shark is a dead shark.
But this one morning I jumped in and found this thresher that had just recently died in the gill net.
And with its huge pectoral fins and eyes still very visible, it struck me as sort of a crucifixion, if you will.
This ended up being the lead picture in the global fishery story in National Geographic.
And I hope that it helped readers to take notice of this problem of 100 million sharks.
And because I love sharks -- I'm somewhat obsessed with sharks -- I wanted to do another, more celebratory, story about sharks, as a way of talking about the need for shark conservation.
So I went to the Bahamas because there're very few places in the world where sharks are doing well these days, but the Bahamas seem to be a place where stocks were reasonably healthy, largely due to the fact that the government there had outlawed longlining several years ago.
And I wanted to show several species that we hadn't shown much in the magazine and worked in a number of locations.
One of the locations was this place called Tiger Beach, in the northern Bahamas where tiger sharks aggregate in shallow water.
This is a low-altitude photograph that I made showing our dive boat with about a dozen of these big old tiger sharks sort of just swimming around behind.
But the one thing I definitely didn't want to do with this coverage was to continue to portray sharks as something like monsters.
I didn't want them to be overly threatening or scary.
And with this photograph of a beautiful 15-feet, probably 14-feet, I guess, female tiger shark, I sort of think I got to that goal, where she was swimming with these little barjacks off her nose, and my strobe created a shadow on her face.
And I think it's a gentler picture, a little less threatening, a little more respectful of the species.
I also searched on this story for the elusive great hammerhead, an animal that really hadn't been photographed much until maybe about seven or 10 years ago.
It's a very solitary creature.
But this is an animal that's considered data deficient by science in both Florida and in the Bahamas.
You know, we know almost nothing about them.
We don't know where they migrate to or from, where they mate, where they have their pups, and yet, hammerhead populations in the Atlantic have declined about 80 percent in the last 20 to 30 years.
You know, we're losing them faster than we can possibly find them.
This is the oceanic whitetip shark, an animal that is considered the fourth most dangerous species, if you pay attention to such lists.
But it's an animal that's about 98 percent in decline throughout most of its range.
Because this is a pelagic animal and it lives out in the deeper water, and because we weren't working on the bottom, I brought along a shark cage here, and my friend, shark biologist Wes Pratt is inside the cage.
You'll see that the photographer, of course, was not inside the cage here, so clearly the biologist is a little smarter than the photographer I guess.
And lastly with this story, I also wanted to focus on baby sharks, shark nurseries.
And I went to the island of Bimini, in the Bahamas, to work with lemon shark pups.
This is a photo of a lemon shark pup, and it shows these animals where they live for the first two to three years of their lives in these protective mangroves.
This is a very sort of un-shark-like photograph.
It's not what you typically might think of as a shark picture.
But, you know, here we see a shark that's maybe 10 or 11 inches long swimming in about a foot of water.
But this is crucial habitat and it's where they spend the first two, three years of their lives, until they're big enough to go out on the rest of the reef.
After I left Bimini, I actually learned that this habitat was being bulldozed to create a new golf course and resort.
And other recent stories have looked at single, flagship species, if you will, that are at risk in the ocean as a way of talking about other threats.
One such story I did documented the leatherback sea turtle.
This is the largest, widest-ranging, deepest-diving and oldest of all turtle species.
Here we see a female crawling out of the ocean under moonlight on the island of Trinidad.
These are animals whose lineage dates back about 100 million years.
And there was a time in their lifespan where they were coming out of the water to nest and saw Tyrannosaurus rex running by.
And today, they crawl out and see condominiums.
But despite this amazing longevity, they're now considered critically endangered.
In the Pacific, where I made this photograph, their stocks have declined about 90 percent in the last 15 years.
This is a photograph that shows a hatchling about to taste saltwater for the very first time beginning this long and perilous journey.
Only one in a thousand leatherback hatchlings will reach maturity.
But that's due to natural predators like vultures that pick them off on a beach or predatory fish that are waiting offshore.
Nature has learned to compensate with that, and females have multiple clutches of eggs to overcome those odds.
But what they can't deal with is anthropogenic stresses, human things, like this picture that shows a leatherback caught at night in a gill net.
I actually jumped in and photographed this, and with the fisherman's permission, I cut the turtle out, and it was able to swim free.
But, you know, thousands of other leatherbacks each year are not so fortunate, and the species' future is in great danger.
Another charismatic megafauna species that I worked with is the story I did on the right whale.
And essentially, the story is this with right whales, that about a million years ago, there was one species of right whale on the planet, but as land masses moved around and oceans became isolated, the species sort of separated, and today we have essentially two distinct stocks.
We have the Southern right whale that we see here and the North Atlantic right whale that we see here with a mom and calf off the coast of Florida.
Now, both species were hunted to the brink of extinction by the early whalers, but the Southern right whales have rebounded a lot better because they're located in places farther away from human activity.
The North Atlantic right whale is listed as the most endangered species on the planet today because they are urban whales; they live along the east coast of North America, United States and Canada, and they have to deal with all these urban ills.
This photo shows an animal popping its head out at sunset off the coast of Florida.
You can see the coal burning plant in the background.
They have to deal with things like toxins and pharmaceuticals that are flushed out into the ocean, and maybe even affecting their reproduction.
They also get entangled in fishing gear.
This is a picture that shows the tail of a right whale.
And those white markings are not natural markings.
These are entanglement scars.
72 percent of the population has such scars, but most don't shed the gear, things like lobster traps and crab pots.
They hold on to them, and it eventually kills them.
And the other problem is they get hit by ships.
And this was an animal that was struck by a ship in Nova Scotia, Canada being towed in, where they did a necropsy to confirm the cause of death, which was indeed a ship strike.
So all of these ills are stacking up against these animals and keeping their numbers very low.
And to draw a contrast with that beleaguered North Atlantic population, I went to a new pristine population of Southern right whales that had only been discovered about 10 years ago in the sub-Antarctic of New Zealand, a place called the Auckland Islands.
I went down there in the winter time.
And these are animals that had never seen humans before, and I was one of the first people they probably had ever seen.
And I got in the water with them, and I was amazed at how curious they were.
This photograph shows my assistant standing on the bottom at about 70 feet and one of these amazingly beautiful, 45-foot, 70-ton whales, like a city bus just swimming up, you know.
They were in perfect condition, very fat and healthy, robust, no entanglement scars, the way they're supposed to look.
You know, I read that the pilgrims, when they landed at Plymouth Rock in Massachusetts in 1620, wrote that you could walk across Cape Cod Bay on the backs of right whales.
And we can't go back and see that today, but maybe we can preserve what we have left.
And I wanted to close this program with a story of hope, a story I did on marine reserves as sort of a solution to the problem of overfishing, the global fish crisis story.
I settled on working in the country of New Zealand because New Zealand was rather progressive, and is rather progressive in terms of protecting their ocean.
And I really wanted this story to be about three things: I wanted it to be about abundance, about diversity and about resilience.
And one of the first places I worked was a reserve called Goat Island in Leigh of New Zealand.
What the scientists there told me was that when protected this first marine reserve in 1975, they hoped and expected that certain things might happen.
For example, they hoped that certain species of fish like the New Zealand snapper would return because they had been fished to the brink of commercial extinction.
And they did come back. What they couldn't predict was that other things would happen.
For example, these fish predate on sea urchins, and when the fish were all gone, all anyone ever saw underwater was just acres and acres of sea urchins.
But when the fish came back and began predating and controlling the urchin population, low and behold, kelp forests emerged in shallow water.
And that's because the urchins eat kelp.
So when the fish control the urchin population, the ocean was restored to its natural equilibrium.
You know, this is probably how the ocean looked here one or 200 years ago, but nobody was around to tell us.
I worked in other parts of New Zealand as well, in beautiful, fragile, protected areas like in Fiordland, where this sea pen colony was found.
Little blue cod swimming in for a dash of color.
In the northern part of New Zealand, I dove in the blue water, where the water's a little warmer, and photographed animals like this giant sting ray swimming through an underwater canyon.
Every part of the ecosystem in this place seems very healthy, from tiny, little animals like a nudibrank crawling over encrusting sponge or a leatherjacket that is a very important animal in this ecosystem because it grazes on the bottom and allows new life to take hold.
And I wanted to finish with this photograph, a picture I made on a very stormy day in New Zealand when I just laid on the bottom amidst a school of fish swirling around me.
And I was in a place that had only been protected about 20 years ago.
And I talked to divers that had been diving there for many years, and they said that the marine life was better here today than it was in the 1960s.
And that's because it's been protected, that it has come back.
So I think the message is clear.
The ocean is, indeed, resilient and tolerant to a point, but we must be good custodians.
I became an underwater photographer because I fell in love with the sea, and I make pictures of it today because I want to protect it, and I don't think it's too late.
Thank you very much.
Tom Green: That's a 4chan thing.
These kids on the Internet, they have this group of kids and they like to say funny words like "barrel roll."
It's a video game move from "Star Fox."
"Star Fox 20"? (Assistant: "Star Fox 64.") Tom Green: Yeah. And they've been dogging me for a year.
I got to tell you, it's driving me nuts, actually.
Sometimes I wake up in the middle of the night and I scream, "4chan!"
Christopher Poole: When I was 15, I found this website called Futaba Channel.
And it was a Japanese forum and imageboard.
That format of forum, at that time, was not well-known outside of Japan.
And so what I did is I took it, I translated it into English, and I stuck it up for my friends to use.
Now, six and a half years later, over seven million people are using it, contributing over 700,000 posts per day.
And we've gone from one board to 48 boards.
This is what it looks like.
So, what's unique about the site is that it's anonymous, and it has no memory.
There's no archive, there are no barriers, there's no registration.
These things that we're used to with forums don't exist on 4chan.
And that's led to this discussion that's completely raw, completely unfiltered.
What the site's known for, because it has this environment, is it's fostered the creation of a lot of Internet phenomena, viral videos and whatnot, known as "memes."
Two of the largest memes that have come out of this site some of you might be familiar with are these LOLcats -- just silly pictures of cats with text.
And this resonates with millions of people, apparently, because there are tens of thousands of these, and there is a whole blogging empire now dedicated to pictures like these.
And Rick Astley's kind of rebirth these past two years ...
Rickroll was this bait and switch, really simple, classic bait and switch.
Somebody says they're linking to something interesting, and you get an '80s pop song. That's all it was.
And it got big enough to the point where there was a float last year at the Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade, and Rick Astley pops out, and rickrolls millions of people on television.
(Laughter) There are thousands of memes that come out of the site.
There are a handful that have escaped into the mainstream, the ones I've just shown you, but every day, every month, people are producing thousands of these.
So does a site like this have rules?
We do; they're the codified rules that I've come up with, which are more-or-less ignored by the community.
And so they've come up with their own set of rules, the "Rules of the Internet."
And so there are three that I want to show you specifically.
Rule one is you don't talk about /b/.
Two is you do not talk about /b/.
And this one's kind of interesting: "If it exists, there is porn of it. No exceptions."
(Laughter) And I will spare you that slide.
I assure you, it is very true.
/b/ is the first board we started with, and it is, in many ways, the beating heart of the website.
It is where a third of all the traffic is going.
And /b/ is known for, more than anything, not just the memes they've created, but the exploits.
And Chris just touched on one of those a second ago, and that was the Time 100 poll.
So somebody at Time, at the magazine, thought it would be fun to nominate me for this thing they did last year.
And so they placed me on it, and the Internet got wind of it. My community decided they wanted me to win it.
I didn't instruct them to do it; they just decided that that's what they wanted.
And so, you know, 390 percent approval rating ain't so bad.
(Laughter) So they broke that poll.
And I ended up on top.
I ended up at this really fancy party.
But that's not what's interesting about this.
It's that they weren't putting me at the top of this list; they were actually -- it got so sophisticated to the point where they gamed all of the top 21 places to spell "mARBLECAKE. ALSO, THE GAME."
(Laughter) The amount of time and effort that went into that is absolutely incredible.
And "marble cake" is significant because it is the channel that this group called Anonymous organized.
Anonymous is this group of people that protested, very famously, Scientology.
The story is, Scientology had this embarrassing video of Tom Cruise. It went up online.
They got it taken offline and managed to piss off part of the Internet.
And so these people, over 7,000 people, less than one month later, organized in a hundred cities around the globe and -- this is L.A. -- protested the Church of Scientology, and they have continued to do so, now, two full years after the fact.
They are still protesting.
(Laughter) So we've got this activist group that's this grassroots group that's come out of the site.
And last, I'm going to show you the example, the story of Dusty the cat.
Dusty is the name that we've given to this cat.
This young man posted a video of him abusing his cat on YouTube.
And, you know, this didn't sit well with people, and so there was this outpouring of support for people to do something about this.
So what they did is they -- I mean, they put CSI to shame here -- the Internet detectives came out.
They matched, they found his MySpace.
They took the YouTube video and they mashed everything in the video.
Within 24 hours, they had his name, and within 48 hours, he was arrested.
(Applause) And so, what I think is really intriguing about a community like 4chan is just that it's this open place.
As I said, it's raw, it's unfiltered.
And sites like it are kind of going the way of the dinosaur right now.
They're endangered because we're moving towards social networking.
We're moving towards persistent identity.
We're moving towards, you know, a lack of privacy, really.
We're sacrificing a lot of that, and I think in doing so, moving towards those things, we're losing something valuable.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you.
Got a couple questions for you.
But if I ask them, is the TED website going to go down?
CP: You're lucky that this is not being streamed to them live right now.
CA: Well, you never know. Some of them -- we've got people in 75 countries out there watching.
Don't tell.
But seriously, this issue on anonymity is -- I mean, you made the case there.
But anonymity basically allows people to say anything, all the rules gone.
You've had to wrestle with issues like child pornography.
And I'm just curious whether you sometimes lie awake in the night worrying that you've opened Pandora's box.
CP: Yes and no.
I mean, for as much good that kind of comes out of this environment, there is plenty of bad.
There are plenty of downsides.
But I think that the greater good is being served here by just allowing people -- there are very few places, now, where you can go and not have identity, to be completely anonymous and say whatever you'd like.
And saying whatever you like, I think, is powerful.
Doing whatever you like is now crossing a line.
But I think it's important to have these places.
When I get emails, people say, "Thank you for giving me this place, this outlet, where I can come after work and be myself."
CA: But words, saying things, you know, can be constructive; it can be really damaging.
And if you cut the link between what is said and any attribution back to you, I mean, surely there are huge risks with that.
CP: There are, certainly.
But -- CA: Tell me about what -- I mean, I think you asked the board what you might say at TED, right?
CP: Yeah, I posted a thread on Sunday.
And within 24 hours, it had over 12,000 responses.
And the thing is, I didn't make it into that presentation because I can't read to you anything that they said, more or less.
(Laughter) 99 percent of it is just, would have been, you know, bleeped out.
But there were some good things that came out of that too.
(Laughter) Love and peace were mentioned.
CA: Love and peace were mentioned, kind of with quote marks around them, right?
CP: Cats and dogs were mentioned too.
CA: And that content is all off the board now.
Right, it's gone? Or is it still up there?
CP: I stuck that thread so it lasted a few days.
It went up to about 16,000 posts, and now it has been taken off.
CA: Okay, well.
Now, I'm not sure I would have necessarily recommended everyone at TED to go and check it out anyway.
Chris, you yourself? I mean, you're a figure of some intrigue.
You've got this surprising semi-underground influence, but it's not making you a lot of money, yet.
What's the commercial picture here?
CP: The commercial picture is that there really isn't much of one, I guess.
The site has adult content on it.
I mean, obviously, it's got some very offensive, obscene content on it, just in terms of language alone.
And when you've got that, you've pretty much sacrificed any hope of making lots of money.
CA: But you still live at home, right?
CP: I actually moved out recently.
CA: That's very cool.
(Applause) CP: I got out of Mom's, and I'm back in school right now.
CA: But what conversations did you or do you have with your mother about 4chan?
CP: At first, very kind of pained, awkward conversations.
The content is not dinner table conversation in the least.
But my parents -- I think part of why they kind of are able to appreciate it is because they don't understand it.
(Laughter) CA: And they were probably pleased to see you on top of the Time poll.
CP: Yeah. They still didn't know what to think of that though.
(Laughter) CA: And so, in 10 years' time, what do you picture yourself doing?
CP: That's a good question.
As I said, I just went back to school, and I am considering majoring in urban studies and then going on to urban planning, kind of taking whatever I've learned from online communities and trying to adapt that to a physical community.
CA: Chris, thank you. Absolutely fascinating. Thank you for coming to TED.
We live in difficult and challenging economic times, of course.
And one of the first victims of difficult economic times, I think, is public spending of any kind, but certainly in the firing line at the moment is public spending for science, and particularly curiosity-led science and exploration.
So I want to try and convince you in about 15 minutes that that's a ridiculous and ludicrous thing to do.
But I think to set the scene, I want to show -- the next slide is not my attempt to show the worst TED slide in the history of TED, but it is a bit of a mess.
(Laughter) But actually, it's not my fault; it's from the Guardian newspaper.
And it's actually a beautiful demonstration of how much science costs.
Because, if I'm going to make the case for continuing to spend on curiosity-driven science and exploration, I should tell you how much it costs.
So this is a game called "spot the science budgets."
This is the U.K. government spend.
You see there, it's about 620 billion a year.
The science budget is actually -- if you look to your left, there's a purple set of blobs and then yellow set of blobs.
And it's one of the yellow set of blobs around the big yellow blob.
It's about 3.3 billion pounds per year out of 620 billion.
That funds everything in the U.K.
from medical research, space exploration, where I work, at CERN in Geneva, particle physics, engineering, even arts and humanities, funded from the science budget, which is that 3.3 billion, that little, tiny yellow blob around the orange blob at the top left of the screen.
So that's what we're arguing about.
That percentage, by the way, is about the same in the U.S. and Germany and France.
R&amp;D in total in the economy, publicly funded, is about 0.6 percent of GDP.
So that's what we're arguing about.
The first thing I want to say, and this is straight from "Wonders of the Solar System," is that our exploration of the solar system and the universe has shown us that it is indescribably beautiful.
This is a picture that actually was sent back by the Cassini space probe around Saturn, after we'd finished filming "Wonders of the Solar System."
So it isn't in the series.
It's of the moon Enceladus.
So that big sweeping, white sphere in the corner is Saturn, which is actually in the background of the picture.
And that crescent there is the moon Enceladus, which is about as big as the British Isles.
It's about 500 kilometers in diameter.
So, tiny moon.
What's fascinating and beautiful ...
this an unprocessed picture, by the way, I should say, it's black and white, straight from Saturnian orbit.
What's beautiful is, you can probably see on the limb there some faint, sort of, wisps of almost smoke rising up from the limb.
This is how we visualize that in "Wonders of the Solar System."
It's a beautiful graphic.
What we found out were that those faint wisps are actually fountains of ice rising up from the surface of this tiny moon.
That's fascinating and beautiful in itself, but we think that the mechanism for powering those fountains requires there to be lakes of liquid water beneath the surface of this moon.
And what's important about that is that, on our planet, on Earth, wherever we find liquid water, we find life.
So, to find strong evidence of liquid, pools of liquid, beneath the surface of a moon 750 million miles away from the Earth is really quite astounding.
So what we're saying, essentially, is maybe that's a habitat for life in the solar system.
Well, let me just say, that was a graphic. I just want to show this picture.
That's one more picture of Enceladus.
This is when Cassini flew beneath Enceladus.
So it made a very low pass, just a few hundred kilometers above the surface.
And so this, again, a real picture of the ice fountains rising up into space, absolutely beautiful.
But that's not the prime candidate for life in the solar system.
That's probably this place, which is a moon of Jupiter, Europa.
And again, we had to fly to the Jovian system to get any sense that this moon, as most moons, was anything other than a dead ball of rock.
It's actually an ice moon.
So what you're looking at is the surface of the moon Europa, which is a thick sheet of ice, probably a hundred kilometers thick.
But by measuring the way that Europa interacts with the magnetic field of Jupiter, and looking at how those cracks in the ice that you can see there on that graphic move around, we've inferred very strongly that there's an ocean of liquid surrounding the entire surface of Europa.
So below the ice, there's an ocean of liquid around the whole moon.
It could be hundreds of kilometers deep, we think.
We think it's saltwater, and that would mean that there's more water on that moon of Jupiter than there is in all the oceans of the Earth combined.
So that place, a little moon around Jupiter, is probably the prime candidate for finding life on a moon or a body outside the Earth, that we know of.
Tremendous and beautiful discovery.
Our exploration of the solar system has taught us that the solar system is beautiful.
It may also have pointed the way to answering one of the most profound questions that you can possibly ask, which is: "Are we alone in the universe?"
Is there any other use to exploration and science, other than just a sense of wonder?
Well, there is.
This is a very famous picture taken, actually, on my first Christmas Eve, December 24th, 1968, when I was about eight months old.
It was taken by Apollo 8 as it went around the back of the moon.
Earthrise from Apollo 8.
A famous picture; many people have said that it's the picture that saved 1968, which was a turbulent year -- the student riots in Paris, the height of the Vietnam War.
The reason many people think that about this picture, and Al Gore has said it many times, actually, on the stage at TED, is that this picture, arguably, was the beginning of the environmental movement.
Because, for the first time, we saw our world, not as a solid, immovable, kind of indestructible place, but as a very small, fragile-looking world just hanging against the blackness of space.
What's also not often said about the space exploration, about the Apollo program, is the economic contribution it made.
I mean while you can make arguments that it was wonderful and a tremendous achievement and delivered pictures like this, it cost a lot, didn't it?
Well, actually, many studies have been done about the economic effectiveness, the economic impact of Apollo.
The biggest one was in 1975 by Chase Econometrics.
And it showed that for every $1 spent on Apollo, 14 came back into the U.S. economy.
So the Apollo program paid for itself in inspiration, in engineering, achievement and, I think, in inspiring young scientists and engineers 14 times over.
So exploration can pay for itself.
What about scientific discovery?
What about driving innovation?
Well, this looks like a picture of virtually nothing.
What it is, is a picture of the spectrum of hydrogen.
See, back in the 1880s, 1890s, many scientists, many observers, looked at the light given off from atoms.
And they saw strange pictures like this.
What you're seeing when you put it through a prism is that you heat hydrogen up and it doesn't just glow like a white light, it just emits light at particular colors, a red one, a light blue one, some dark blue ones.
Now that led to an understanding of atomic structure because the way that's explained is atoms are a single nucleus with electrons going around them.
And the electrons can only be in particular places.
And when they jump up to the next place they can be, and fall back down again, they emit light at particular colors.
And so the fact that atoms, when you heat them up, only emit light at very specific colors, was one of the key drivers that led to the development of the quantum theory, the theory of the structure of atoms.
I just wanted to show this picture because this is remarkable.
This is actually a picture of the spectrum of the Sun.
And now, this is a picture of atoms in the Sun's atmosphere absorbing light.
And again, they only absorb light at particular colors when electrons jump up and fall down, jump up and fall down.
But look at the number of black lines in that spectrum.
And the element helium was discovered just by staring at the light from the Sun because some of those black lines were found that corresponded to no known element.
And that's why helium's called helium.
It's called "helios" -- helios from the Sun.
Now, that sounds esoteric, and indeed it was an esoteric pursuit, but the quantum theory quickly led to an understanding of the behaviors of electrons in materials like silicon, for example.
The way that silicon behaves, the fact that you can build transistors, is a purely quantum phenomenon.
So without that curiosity-driven understanding of the structure of atoms, which led to this rather esoteric theory, quantum mechanics, then we wouldn't have transistors, we wouldn't have silicon chips, we wouldn't have pretty much the basis of our modern economy.
There's one more, I think, wonderful twist to that tale.
In "Wonders of the Solar System," we kept emphasizing the laws of physics are universal.
It's one of the most incredible things about the physics and the understanding of nature that you get on Earth, is you can transport it, not only to the planets, but to the most distant stars and galaxies.
And one of the astonishing predictions of quantum mechanics, just by looking at the structure of atoms -- the same theory that describes transistors -- is that there can be no stars in the universe that have reached the end of their life that are bigger than, quite specifically, 1.4 times the mass of the Sun.
That's a limit imposed on the mass of stars.
You can work it out on a piece of paper in a laboratory, get a telescope, swing it to the sky, and you find that there are no dead stars bigger than 1.4 times the mass of the Sun.
That's quite an incredible prediction.
What happens when you have a star that's right on the edge of that mass?
Well, this is a picture of it.
This is the picture of a galaxy, a common "our garden" galaxy with, what, 100 billion stars like our Sun in it.
It's just one of billions of galaxies in the universe.
There are a billion stars in the galactic core, which is why it's shining out so brightly.
This is about 50 million light years away, so one of our neighboring galaxies.
But that bright star there is actually one of the stars in the galaxy.
So that star is also 50 million light years away.
It's part of that galaxy, and it's shining as brightly as the center of the galaxy with a billion suns in it.
That's a Type Ia supernova explosion.
Now that's an incredible phenomena, because it's a star that sits there.
It's called a carbon-oxygen dwarf.
It sits there about, say, 1.3 times the mass of the Sun.
And it has a binary companion that goes around it, so a big star, a big ball of gas.
And what it does is it sucks gas off its companion star, until it gets to this limit called the Chandrasekhar limit, and then it explodes.
And it explodes, and it shines as brightly as a billion suns for about two weeks, and releases, not only energy, but a huge amount of chemical elements into the universe.
In fact, that one is a carbon-oxygen dwarf.
Now, there was no carbon and oxygen in the universe at the Big Bang.
And there was no carbon and oxygen in the universe throughout the first generation of stars.
It was made in stars like that, locked away and then returned to the universe in explosions like that in order to recondense into planets, stars, new solar systems and, indeed, people like us.
I think that's a remarkable demonstration of the power and beauty and universality of the laws of physics, because we understand that process, because we understand the structure of atoms here on Earth.
This is a beautiful quote that I found -- we're talking about serendipity there -- from Alexander Fleming: "When I woke up just after dawn on September 28, 1928, I certainly didn't plan to revolutionize all medicine by discovering the world's first antibiotic."
Now, the explorers of the world of the atom did not intend to invent the transistor.
And they certainly didn't intend to describe the mechanics of supernova explosions, which eventually told us where the building blocks of life were synthesized in the universe.
So, I think science can be -- serendipity is important.
It can be beautiful. It can reveal quite astonishing things.
It can also, I think, finally reveal the most profound ideas to us about our place in the universe and really the value of our home planet.
This is a spectacular picture of our home planet.
Now, it doesn't look like our home planet.
It looks like Saturn because, of course, it is.
It was taken by the Cassini space probe.
But it's a famous picture, not because of the beauty and majesty of Saturn's rings, but actually because of a tiny, faint blob just hanging underneath one of the rings.
And if I blow it up there, you see it.
It looks like a moon, but in fact, it's a picture of Earth.
It was a picture of Earth captured in that frame of Saturn.
That's our planet from 750 million miles away.
I think the Earth has got a strange property that the farther away you get from it, the more beautiful it seems.
But that is not the most distant or most famous picture of our planet.
It was taken by this thing, which is called the Voyager spacecraft.
And that's a picture of me in front of it for scale.
The Voyager is a tiny machine.
It's currently 10 billion miles away from Earth, transmitting with that dish, with the power of 20 watts, and we're still in contact with it.
But it visited Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.
And after it visited all four of those planets, Carl Sagan, who's one of my great heroes, had the wonderful idea of turning Voyager around and taking a picture of every planet it had visited.
And it took this picture of Earth.
Now it's very hard to see the Earth there, it's called the "Pale Blue Dot" picture, but Earth is suspended in that red shaft of light.
That's Earth from four billion miles away.
And I'd like to read you what Sagan wrote about it, just to finish, because I cannot say words as beautiful as this to describe what he saw in that picture that he had taken.
He said, "Consider again that dot.
That's here. That's home. That's us.
On it, everyone you love, everyone you know, everyone you've ever heard of, every human being who ever was lived out their lives.
The aggregates of joy and suffering thousands of confident religions, ideologies and economic doctrines, every hunter and forager, every hero and coward, every creator and destroyer of civilization, every king and peasant, every young couple in love, every mother and father, hopeful child, inventor and explorer, every teacher of morals, every corrupt politician, every superstar, every supreme leader, every saint and sinner in the history of our species, lived there, on a mote of dust, suspended in a sunbeam.
It's been said that astronomy's a humbling and character-building experience.
There is perhaps no better demonstration of the folly of human conceits than this distant image of our tiny world.
To me, it underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly with one another and to preserve and cherish the pale blue dot, the only home we've ever known."
Beautiful words about the power of science and exploration.
The argument has always been made, and it will always be made, that we know enough about the universe.
You could have made it in the 1920s; you wouldn't have had penicillin.
You could have made it in the 1890s; you wouldn't have the transistor.
And it's made today in these difficult economic times.
Surely, we know enough.
We don't need to discover anything else about our universe.
Let me leave the last words to someone who's rapidly becoming a hero of mine, Humphrey Davy, who did his science at the turn of the 19th century.
He was clearly under assault all the time.
"We know enough at the turn of the 19th century.
Just exploit it; just build things."
He said this, he said, "Nothing is more fatal to the progress of the human mind than to presume that our views of science are ultimate, that our triumphs are complete, that there are no mysteries in nature, and that there are no new worlds to conquer."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hi there.
I'm going to be talking a little bit about music, machines and life.
Or, more specifically, what we learned from the creation of a very large and complicated machine for a music video.
Some of you may recognize this image.
This is the opening frame of the video that we created.
We'll be showing the video at the end, but before we do, I want to talk a little bit about what it is that they wanted.
Now, when we first started talking to OK Go -- the name of the song is "This Too Shall Pass" -- we were really excited because they expressed interest in building a machine that they could dance with.
And we were very excited about this because, of course, they have a history of dancing with machines.
They're responsible for this video, "Here It Goes Again."
50-million-plus views on YouTube.
Four guys dancing on treadmills, no cuts, just a static camera.
A fantastically viral and wonderful video.
So we were really excited about working with them.
And we sort of started talking about what it is that they wanted.
And they explained that they wanted kind of a Rube Goldberg machine.
Now, for those of you who don't know, a Rube Goldberg machine is a complicated contraption, an incredibly over-engineered piece of machinery that accomplishes a relatively simple task.
So we were excited by this idea, and we started talking about exactly what it would look like.
And we came up with some parameters, because, you know, building a Rube Goldberg machine has limitations, but it also is pretty wide open.
And we wanted to make sure that we did something that would work for a music video.
So we came up with a list of requirements, the "10 commandments," and they were, in order of ascending difficulty: The first is "No magic."
Everything that happened on screen had to be very easily understood by a typical viewer.
The rule of thumb was that, if my mother couldn't understand it, then we couldn't use it in the video.
They wanted band integration, that is, the machine acting upon the band members, specifically not the other way around.
They wanted the machine action to follow the song feeling.
So as the song picks up emotion, so should the machine get grander in its process.
They wanted us to make use of the space.
So we have this 10,000-square-foot warehouse we were using, divided between two floors.
It included an exterior loading dock.
We used all of that, including a giant hole in the floor that we actually descended the camera and cameraman through.
They wanted it messy, and we were happy to oblige.
The machine itself would start the music.
So the machine would get started, it would travel some distance, reacting along the way, hit play on an iPod or a tape deck or something that would start playback.
And the machine would maintain synchronization throughout.
And speaking of synchronization, they wanted it to sync to the rhythm and to hit specific beats along the way.
Okay. (Laughter) They wanted it to end precisely on time.
Okay, so now the start to finish timing has to be perfect.
And they wanted the music to drop out at a certain point in the video and actual live audio from the machine to play part of the song.
And as if that wasn't enough, all of these incredibly complicating things, right, they wanted it in one shot.
(Laughter) (Applause) Okay.
So, just some statistics about what we went through in the process.
The machine itself has 89 distinct interactions.
It took us 85 takes to get it on film to our satisfaction.
Of those 85 takes, only three actually successfully completed their run.
We destroyed two pianos and 10 televisions in the process.
We went to Home Depot well over a hundred times.
(Laughter) And we lost one high-heeled shoe when one of our engineers, Heather Knight, left her high-heeled shoe -- after a nice dinner, and returned back to the build -- and left it in a pile of stuff.
And another engineer thought, "Well, that would be a really good thing to use" and ended up using it as a really nice trigger.
And it's actually in the machine.
So what did we learn from all of this?
Well, having completed this, we have the opportunity to step back and reflect on some of the things.
And we learned that small stuff stinks.
Little balls in wooden tracks are really susceptible to humidity and temperature and a little bit of dust, and they fall out of the tracks, the exact angles makes it hard to get right.
And yet, a bowling ball will always follow the same path.
It doesn't matter what temperature it is, doesn't matter what's in its way; it will pretty much get where it needs to go.
But as much as the small stuff stinks, we needed somewhere to start, so that we would have somewhere to go.
And so you have to start with it. You have to focus on it.
Small stuff stinks, but, of course, it's essential, right?
What else? Planning is incredibly important.
(Laughter) You know, we spent a lot of time ideating and even building some of these things.
It's been said that, "No battle plan survives contact with the enemy."
I think our enemy was physics -- (Laughter) and she's a cruel mistress.
Often, we had to pull things out as a result because of timing or aesthetics or whatever.
And so while planning is important, so is flexibility.
These are all things that ended up not making it into the final machine.
So also, put reliable stuff last, the stuff that's going to run every time.
Again, small to large is relevant here.
The little Lego car in the beginning of the video references the big, real car near the end of the video.
The big, real car works every time; there's no problem about it.
The little one had a tendency to try to run off the track and that's a problem.
But you don't want to have to reset the whole machine because the Lego car at the end doesn't work, right.
So you put that up front so that, if it fails, at least you know you don't have to reset the whole thing.
Life can be messy.
There were incredibly difficult moments in the building of this thing.
Months were spent in this tiny, cold warehouse.
And the wonderful elation that we had when we finally completed it.
So it's important to remember that whether it's good or it's bad, "This Too Shall Pass."
Thank you very much.
(Applause) And now to introduce their music video, we have OK Go.
OK Go: An introduction. Hello TEDxUSC.
We are OK Go.
What are we doing? Oh, just hanging out with our Grammy. What what!
It think we can do better than this. Hello TEDxUSC.
We are OK Go. Have you read the "Natural Curiosity Cabinet?"
I mean, "Curiosity" -- excuse me.
Let me start again.
We need some more ridiculous things besides "The Cabinet of Natural Curiosities."
Tim's sundial hat.
Have you seen the new work they've done to the Waltz Towers?
Sorry, start again.
(Barking) Dogs.
Hello, TEDxUSC. We are OK Go, and this our new video, "This Too Shall Pass."
[unclear] Kay, we can still do one better I think, yeah.
That one's pretty good. It's getting better.
(Music)  You know you can't keep letting it get you down   And you can't keep dragging that dead weight around   If there ain't all that much to lug around   Better run like hell when you hit the ground   When the morning comes   When the morning comes   You can't stop these kids from dancing   Why would you want to?   Especially when you're already getting yours   Cuz if your mind don't move and your knees don't bend   Well don't go blaming the kids again   When the morning comes   When the morning comes   When the morning comes   When the morning comes   When the morning comes   When the morning comes   Let it go   This too shall pass   Let it go   This too shall pass   You know you can't keep letting it get you down   No, you can't keep letting it get you down   Let it go   This too shall pass   When the morning comes   When the morning comes   When the morning comes   When the morning comes  (Cheering)
Azim Khamisa: We humans have many defining moments in our lives.
Sometimes these moments are joyous, and sometimes they are heartbreaking, tragic.
But at these defining moments, if we are able to make the right choice, we literally manifest a miracle in us and others.
My only son Tariq, a university student, kind, generous, a good writer, a good photographer, had aspirations to work for National Geographic, engaged to a beautiful lady, worked as a pizza deliveryman on Fridays and Saturdays.
He was lured to a bogus address by a youth gang.
And in a gang initiation, a 14-year-old shot and killed him.
The sudden, senseless death of an innocent, unarmed human being; the overwhelming grief of a family; the total confusion as you try to absorb a new, hideous reality.
Needless to say it brought my life to a crashing halt.
One of the hardest things I've ever had to do was to call his mother, who lived in a different city.
How do you tell a mother she's never going to see her son again, or hear him laugh, or give him a hug?
I practice as a Sufi Muslim.
I meditate two hours a day.
And sometimes, in deep trauma and deep tragedy, there is a spark of clarity.
So what I downloaded in my meditation is that there were victims at both ends of the gun.
It's easy to see that my son was a victim of the 14-year-old, a little bit complicated to see that he was a victim of American society.
And that begs the question, well, who is American society?
Well, it's you and me, because I don't believe that society is just happenstance.
I think we are all responsible for the society we've created.
And children killing children is not a mark of a civil society.
So nine months after Tariq died, I started the Tariq Khamisa Foundation and our mandate at the Tariq Khamisa Foundation is to stop kids from killing kids by breaking the cycle of youth violence.
And essentially we have three mandates.
Our first and foremost is to save lives of children.
It's important to do. We lose so many on a daily basis.
Our second mandate is to empower the right choices so kids don't fall through the cracks and choose lives of gangs and crime and drugs and alcohol and weapons.
And our third mandate is to teach the principles of nonviolence, of empathy, of compassion, of forgiveness.
And I started with a very simple premise that violence is a learned behavior.
No child was born violent.
If you accept that as a truism, nonviolence can also be a learned behavior, but you have to teach it, because kids are not going to learn that through osmosis.
Soon after that, I reached out to my brother here, with the attitude that we had both lost a son.
My son died.
He lost his grandson to the adult prison system.
And I asked him to join me.
As you see, 22 years later, we are still here together, because I can't bring Tariq back from the dead, you can't take Tony out of prison, but the one thing we can do is make sure no other young people in our community end up dead or end up in prison.
With the grace of God, the Tariq Khamisa Foundation has been successful.
We have a safe school model which has four different programs.
The first one is a live assembly with Ples and me.
We are introduced, this man's grandson killed this man's son, and here they are together.
We have in-classroom curriculum.
We have an after school mentoring program, and we create a peace club.
And I'm happy to share with you that besides teaching these principles of nonviolence, we are able to cut suspensions and expulsions by 70 percent, which is huge.
(Applause) Which is huge.
Five years after Tariq died, and for me to complete my journey of forgiveness, I went to see the young man who killed my son.
He was 19 years old.
And I remember that meeting because we were -- he's 37, still in prison -- but at that first meeting, we locked eyeballs.
I'm looking in his eyes, he's looking in my eyes, and I'm looking in his eyes trying to find a murderer, and I didn't.
I was able to climb through his eyes and touch his humanity that I got that the spark in him was no different than the spark in me or anybody else here.
So I wasn't expecting that. He was remorseful.
He was articulate. He was well-mannered.
And I could tell that my hand of forgiveness had changed him.
So with that, please welcome my brother, Ples.
(Applause) Ples Felix: Tony is my one and only daughter's one and only child.
Tony was born to my daughter, who was 15 when she gave birth to Tony.
Mothering is the toughest job on the planet.
There is no tougher job on the planet than raising another human being and making sure they're safe, secure and well-positioned to be successful in life.
Tony experienced a lot of violence in his life as a young kid.
He saw one of his favorite cousins be murdered in a hail of automatic weapon fire and gang involvement in Los Angeles.
He was very traumatized in so many different ways.
Tony came to live with me.
I wanted to make sure he had everything a kid needed to be successful.
But on this particular evening, after years of being with me and struggling mightily to try to be successful and to live up to my expectations of being a successful person, on this one particular day, Tony ran away from home that evening, he went to be with people he thought were his friends, he was given drugs and alcohol and he took them because he thought they would make him feel carefree.
But all it did was to make his anxiety go higher and to create a more ...
more deadly thinking on his part.
He was invited to a robbery, he was given a 9mm handgun.
And at the presence of an 18-year-old who commanded him and two 14-year-old boys he thought were his friends, he shot and killed Tariq Khamisa, this man's son.
There are no words, there are no words that can express the loss of a child.
At my understanding that my grandson was responsible for the murder of this human being, I went to the prayer closet, like I was taught by my old folks, and began to pray and meditate.
The one thing that Mr. Khamisa and I have in common, and we didn't know this, besides being wonderful human beings, is that we both meditate.
(Laughter) It was very helpful for me because it offered me an opportunity to seek guidance and clarity about how I wanted to be of support of this man and his family in this loss.
And sure enough, my prayers were answered, because I was invited to a meeting at this man's house, met his mother, his father, his wife, his brother, met their family and had a chance to be in the presence of God-spirited people led by this man, who in the spirit of forgiveness, made way, made an opportunity for me to be of value and to share with him and to share with children the importance of understanding the need to be with a responsible adult, focus on your anger in a way that's healthy, learn to meditate.
The programs that we have in the Tariq Khamisa Foundation provide so many tools for the kids to put in their toolkit so they could carry them throughout their lives.
It's important that our children understand that loving, caring adults care for them and support them, but it's also important that our children learn to meditate, learn to be peaceful, learn to be centered and learn to interact with the other children in a kind, empathetic and wonderfully loving way.
We need more love in our society and that's why we are here to share the love with children, because our children will lead the way for us, because all of us will depend on our children.
As we grow older and retire, they will take over this world for us, so as much love as we teach them, they will give it back to us.
Blessings. Thank you.
(Applause) AK: So I was born in Kenya, I was educated in England, and my brother here is a Baptist.
I practice as a Sufi Muslim.
He's African American, but I always tell him, I'm the African American in the group.
I was born in Africa. You were not.
(Laughter) And I naturalized as a citizen.
I'm a first-generation citizen.
And I felt that, as an American citizen, I must take my share of the responsibility for the murder of my son.
Why? Because it was fired by an American child.
You could take the position, he killed my one and only son, he should be hung from the highest pole.
How does that improve society?
And I know you are probably wondering what happened to that young man.
He's still in prison. He just turned 37 on September 22, but I have some good news.
We've been trying to get him out for 12 years.
He finally will join us a year from now.
(Applause) And I'm very excited to have him join us, because I know we've saved him, but he will save tens of thousands of students when he shares his testimony in schools that we are present at on a regular basis.
When he says to the kids, "When I was 11, I joined a gang.
When I was 14, I murdered Mr. Khamisa's son.
I've spent the last umpteen years in prison.
I'm here to tell you: it's not worth it," do you think the kids will listen to that voice?
Yes, because his intonations will be of a person that pulled the trigger.
And I know that he wants to turn the clock back.
Of course, that's not possible.
I wish it was. I would have my son back.
My brother would have his grandson back.
So I think that demonstrates the power of forgiveness.
So what's the big takeaway here?
So I want to end our session with this quote, which is the basis of my fourth book, which incidentally, the foreword for that book was written by Tony.
So it goes like this: sustained goodwill creates friendship.
You don't make friends by bombing them, right?
You make friends by extending goodwill.
That ought to be obvious.
So sustained goodwill creates friendship, sustained friendship creates trust, sustained trust creates empathy, sustained empathy creates compassion, and sustained compassion creates peace.
I call this my peace formula.
It starts with goodwill, friendship, trust, empathy, compassion and peace.
But people ask me, how do you extend goodwill to the person who murdered your child?
I tell them, you do that through forgiveness.
As it's evident it worked for me.
It worked for my family.
What's a miracle is it worked for Tony, it worked for his family, it can work for you and your family, for Israel and Palestine, North and South Korea, for Iraq, Afghanistan, Iran and Syria.
It can work for the United States of America.
So let me leave you with this, my sisters, and a couple of brothers -- (Laughter) that peace is possible.
How do I know that?
Because I am at peace.
Thank you very much. Namaste.
(Applause)
One thing the world needs, one thing this country desperately needs is a better way of conducting our political debates.
We need to rediscover the lost art of democratic argument.
(Applause) If you think about the arguments we have, most of the time it's shouting matches on cable television, ideological food fights on the floor of Congress.
I have a suggestion.
Look at all the arguments we have these days over health care, over bonuses and bailouts on Wall Street, over the gap between rich and poor, over affirmative action and same-sex marriage.
Lying just beneath the surface of those arguments, with passions raging on all sides, are big questions of moral philosophy, big questions of justice.
But we too rarely articulate and defend and argue about those big moral questions in our politics.
So what I would like to do today is have something of a discussion.
First, let me take a famous philosopher who wrote about those questions of justice and morality, give you a very short lecture on Aristotle of ancient Athens, Aristotle's theory of justice, and then have a discussion here to see whether Aristotle's ideas actually inform the way we think and argue about questions today.
So, are you ready for the lecture?
According to Aristotle, justice means giving people what they deserve.
That's it; that's the lecture.
(Laughter) Now, you may say, well, that's obvious enough.
The real questions begin when it comes to arguing about who deserves what and why.
Take the example of flutes.
Suppose we're distributing flutes.
Who should get the best ones?
Let's see what people -- What would you say?
Who should get the best flute?
You can just call it out.
(Audience: Random.) Michael Sandel: At random. You would do it by lottery.
Or by the first person to rush into the hall to get them.
Who else?
(Audience: The best flute players.) MS: The best flute players. (Audience: The worst flute players.) MS: The worst flute players.
How many say the best flute players?
Why?
Actually, that was Aristotle's answer too.
(Laughter) But here's a harder question.
Why do you think, those of you who voted this way, that the best flutes should go to the best flute players?
Peter: The greatest benefit to all.
MS: The greatest benefit to all.
We'll hear better music if the best flutes should go to the best flute players.
That's Peter? (Audience: Peter.) MS: All right.
Well, it's a good reason.
We'll all be better off if good music is played rather than terrible music.
But Peter, Aristotle doesn't agree with you that that's the reason.
That's all right.
Aristotle had a different reason for saying the best flutes should go to the best flute players.
He said, that's what flutes are for -- to be played well.
He says that to reason about just distribution of a thing, we have to reason about, and sometimes argue about, the purpose of the thing, or the social activity -- in this case, musical performance.
And the point, the essential nature, of musical performance is to produce excellent music.
It'll be a happy byproduct that we'll all benefit.
But when we think about justice, Aristotle says, what we really need to think about is the essential nature of the activity in question and the qualities that are worth honoring and admiring and recognizing.
One of the reasons that the best flute players should get the best flutes is that musical performance is not only to make the rest of us happy, but to honor and recognize the excellence of the best musicians.
Now, flutes may seem ... the distribution of flutes may seem a trivial case.
Let's take a contemporary example of the dispute about justice.
It had to do with golf.
Casey Martin -- a few years ago, Casey Martin -- did any of you hear about him?
He was a very good golfer, but he had a disability.
He had a bad leg, a circulatory problem, that made it very painful for him to walk the course.
In fact, it carried risk of injury.
He asked the PGA, the Professional Golfers' Association, for permission to use a golf cart in the PGA tournaments.
They said, "No.
Now that would give you an unfair advantage."
He sued, and his case went all the way to the Supreme Court, believe it or not, the case over the golf cart, because the law says that the disabled must be accommodated, provided the accommodation does not change the essential nature of the activity.
He says, "I'm a great golfer.
I want to compete.
But I need a golf cart to get from one hole to the next."
Suppose you were on the Supreme Court.
Suppose you were deciding the justice of this case.
How many here would say that Casey Martin does have a right to use a golf cart?
And how many say, no, he doesn't?
All right, let's take a poll, show of hands.
How many would rule in favor of Casey Martin?
And how many would not? How many would say he doesn't?
All right, we have a good division of opinion here.
Someone who would not grant Casey Martin the right to a golf cart, what would be your reason?
Raise your hand, and we'll try to get you a microphone.
What would be your reason?
(Audience: It'd be an unfair advantage.) MS: It would be an unfair advantage if he gets to ride in a golf cart.
All right, those of you, I imagine most of you who would not give him the golf cart worry about an unfair advantage.
What about those of you who say he should be given a golf cart?
How would you answer the objection?
Yes, all right.
Audience: The cart's not part of the game.
MS: What's your name? (Audience: Charlie.) MS: Charlie says -- We'll get Charlie a microphone in case someone wants to reply.
Tell us, Charlie, why would you say he should be able to use a golf cart?
Charlie: The cart's not part of the game.
MS: But what about walking from hole to hole?
Charlie: It doesn't matter; it's not part of the game.
MS: Walking the course is not part of the game of golf?
Charlie: Not in my book, it isn't.
MS: All right. Stay there, Charlie.
(Laughter) Who has an answer for Charlie?
All right, who has an answer for Charlie?
What would you say?
Audience: The endurance element is a very important part of the game, walking all those holes.
MS: Walking all those holes?
That's part of the game of golf? (Audience: Absolutely.) MS: What's your name? (Audience: Warren.) MS: Warren.
Charlie, what do you say to Warren?
Charley: I'll stick to my original thesis.
(Laughter) MS: Warren, are you a golfer?
Warren: I am not a golfer.
Charley: And I am. (MS: Okay.) (Laughter) (Applause) You know, it's interesting.
In the case, in the lower court, they brought in golfing greats to testify on this very issue.
Is walking the course essential to the game?
And they brought in Jack Nicklaus and Arnold Palmer.
And what do you suppose they all said?
Yes. They agreed with Warren.
They said, yes, walking the course is strenuous physical exercise.
The fatigue factor is an important part of golf.
And so it would change the fundamental nature of the game to give him the golf cart.
Now, notice, something interesting -- Well, I should tell you about the Supreme Court first.
The Supreme Court decided.
What do you suppose they said?
They said yes, that Casey Martin must be provided a golf cart.
Seven to two, they ruled.
What was interesting about their ruling and about the discussion we've just had is that the discussion about the right, the justice, of the matter depended on figuring out what is the essential nature of golf.
And the Supreme Court justices wrestled with that question.
And Justice Stevens, writing for the majority, said he had read all about the history of golf, and the essential point of the game is to get very small ball from one place into a hole in as few strokes as possible, and that walking was not essential, but incidental.
Now, there were two dissenters, one of whom was Justice Scalia.
He wouldn't have granted the cart, and he had a very interesting dissent.
It's interesting because he rejected the Aristotelian premise underlying the majority's opinion.
He said it's not possible to determine the essential nature of a game like golf.
Here's how he put it.
"To say that something is essential is ordinarily to say that it is necessary to the achievement of a certain object.
But since it is the very nature of a game to have no object except amusement, (Laughter) that is, what distinguishes games from productive activity, (Laughter) it is quite impossible to say that any of a game's arbitrary rules is essential."
So there you have Justice Scalia taking on the Aristotelian premise of the majority's opinion.
Justice Scalia's opinion is questionable for two reasons.
First, no real sports fan would talk that way.
(Laughter) If we had thought that the rules of the sports we care about are merely arbitrary, rather than designed to call forth the virtues and the excellences that we think are worthy of admiring, we wouldn't care about the outcome of the game.
It's also objectionable on a second ground.
On the face of it, it seemed to be -- this debate about the golf cart -- an argument about fairness, what's an unfair advantage.
But if fairness were the only thing at stake, there would have been an easy and obvious solution.
What would it be? (Audience: Let everyone use the cart.) Let everyone ride in a golf cart if they want to.
Then the fairness objection goes away.
But letting everyone ride in a cart would have been, I suspect, more anathema to the golfing greats and to the PGA, even than making an exception for Casey Martin.
Why?
Because what was at stake in the dispute over the golf cart was not only the essential nature of golf, but, relatedly, the question: What abilities are worthy of honor and recognition as athletic talents?
Let me put the point as delicately as possible: Golfers are a little sensitive about the athletic status of their game.
(Laughter) After all, there's no running or jumping, and the ball stands still.
(Laughter) So if golfing is the kind of game that can be played while riding around in a golf cart, it would be hard to confer on the golfing greats the status that we confer, the honor and recognition that goes to truly great athletes.
That illustrates that with golf, as with flutes, it's hard to decide the question of what justice requires, without grappling with the question, "What is the essential nature of the activity in question, and what qualities, what excellences connected with that activity, are worthy of honor and recognition?"
Let's take a final example that's prominent in contemporary political debate: same-sex marriage.
There are those who favor state recognition only of traditional marriage between one man and one woman, and there are those who favor state recognition of same-sex marriage.
How many here favor the first policy: the state should recognize traditional marriage only?
And how many favor the second, same-sex marriage?
Now, put it this way: What ways of thinking about justice and morality underlie the arguments we have over marriage?
The opponents of same-sex marriage say that the purpose of marriage, fundamentally, is procreation, and that's what's worthy of honoring and recognizing and encouraging.
And the defenders of same-sex marriage say no, procreation is not the only purpose of marriage; what about a lifelong, mutual, loving commitment?
That's really what marriage is about.
So with flutes, with golf carts, and even with a fiercely contested question like same-sex marriage, Aristotle has a point.
Very hard to argue about justice without first arguing about the purpose of social institutions and about what qualities are worthy of honor and recognition.
So let's step back from these cases and see how they shed light on the way we might improve, elevate, the terms of political discourse in the United States, and for that matter, around the world.
There is a tendency to think that if we engage too directly with moral questions in politics, that's a recipe for disagreement, and for that matter, a recipe for intolerance and coercion.
So better to shy away from, to ignore, the moral and the religious convictions that people bring to civic life.
It seems to me that our discussion reflects the opposite, that a better way to mutual respect is to engage directly with the moral convictions citizens bring to public life, rather than to require that people leave their deepest moral convictions outside politics before they enter.
That, it seems to me, is a way to begin to restore the art of democratic argument.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much.
Thanks. Thank you.
Chris.
Thanks, Chris.
Chris Anderson: From flutes to golf courses to same-sex marriage -- that was a genius link.
Now look, you're a pioneer of open education.
Your lecture series was one of the first to do it big.
What's your vision for the next phase of this?
MS: Well, I think that it is possible.
In the classroom, we have arguments on some of the most fiercely held moral convictions that students have about big public questions.
And I think we can do that in public life more generally.
And so my real dream would be to take the public television series that we've created of the course -- it's available now, online, free for everyone anywhere in the world -- and to see whether we can partner with institutions, at universities in China, in India, in Africa, around the world, to try to promote civic education and also a richer kind of democratic debate.
CA: So you picture, at some point, live, in real time, you could have this kind of conversation, inviting questions, but with people from China and India joining in?
MS: Right. We did a little bit of it here with 1,500 people in Long Beach, and we do it in a classroom at Harvard with about 1,000 students.
Wouldn't it be interesting to take this way of thinking and arguing, engaging seriously with big moral questions, exploring cultural differences and connect through a live video hookup, students in Beijing and Mumbai and in Cambridge, Massachusetts and create a global classroom.
That's what I would love to do.
(Applause) CA: So, I would imagine that there are a lot of people who would love to join you in that endeavor.
Michael Sandel. Thank you so much. (MS: Thanks so much.)
You only get one chance to make a first impression, and that's true if you're a robot as well as if you're a person.
The first time that I met one of these robots was at a place called Willow Garage in 2008.
When I went to visit there, my host walked me into the building and we met this little guy.
He was rolling into the hallway, came up to me, sat there, stared blankly past me, did nothing for a while, rapidly spun his head around 180 degrees and then ran away.
And that was not a great first impression.
The thing that I learned about robots that day is that they kind of do their own thing, and they're not totally aware of us.
And I think as we're experimenting with these possible robot futures, we actually end up learning a lot more about ourselves as opposed to just these machines.
And what I learned that day was that I had pretty high expectations for this little dude.
He was not only supposed to be able to navigate the physical world, but also be able to navigate my social world -- he's in my space; it's a personal robot.
wWhy didn't it understand me?
My host explained to me, "Well, the robot is trying to get from point A to point B, and you were an obstacle in his way, so he had to replan his path, figure out where to go, and then get there some other way," which was actually not a very efficient thing to do.
If that robot had figured out that I was a person, not a chair, and that I was willing to get out of its way if it was trying to get somewhere, then it actually would have been more efficient at getting its job done if it had bothered to notice that I was a human and that I have different affordances than things like chairs and walls do.
You know, we tend to think of these robots as being from outer space and from the future and from science fiction, and while that could be true, I'd actually like to argue that robots are here today, and they live and work amongst us right now.
These are two robots that live in my home.
They vacuum the floors and they cut the grass every single day, which is more than I would do if I actually had time to do these tasks, and they probably do it better than I would, too.
This one actually takes care of my kitty.
Every single time he uses the box, it cleans it, which is not something I'm willing to do, and it actually makes his life better as well as mine.
And while we call these robot products -- it's a "robot vacuum cleaner, it's a robot lawnmower, it's a robot littler box," I think there's actually a bunch of other robots hiding in plain sight that have just become so darn useful and so darn mundane that we call them things like, "dishwasher," right?
They get new names.
They don't get called robot anymore because they actually serve a purpose in our lives.
Similarly, a thermostat, right?
I know my robotics friends out there are probably cringing at me calling this a robot, but it has a goal.
Its goal is to make my house 66 degrees Fahrenheit, and it senses the world.
It knows it's a little bit cold, it makes a plan and then it acts on the physical world.
It's robotics.
Even if it might not look like Rosie the Robot, it's doing something that's really useful in my life so I don't have to take care of turning the temperature up and down myself.
And I think these systems live and work amongst us now, and not only are these systems living amongst us but you are probably a robot operator, too.
When you drive your car, it feels like you are operating machinery.
You are also going from point A to point B, but your car probably has power steering, it probably has automatic braking systems, it might have an automatic transmission and maybe even adaptive cruise control.
And while it might not be a fully autonomous car, it has bits of autonomy, and they're so useful and they make us drive safer, and we just sort of feel like they're invisible-in-use, right?
So when you're driving your car, you should just feel like you're going from one place to another.
It doesn't feel like it's this big thing that you have to deal with and operate and use these controls because we spent so long learning how to drive that they've become extensions of ourselves.
When you park that car in that tight little garage space, you know where your corners are.
And when you drive a rental car that maybe you haven't driven before, it takes some time to get used to your new robot body.
And this is also true for people who operate other types of robots, so I'd like to share with you a few stories about that.
Dealing with the problem of remote collaboration.
So, at Willow Garage I had a coworker named Dallas, and Dallas looked like this.
He worked from his home in Indiana in our company in California.
He was a voice in a box on the table in most of our meetings, which was kind of OK except that, you know, if we had a really heated debate and we didn't like what he was saying, we might just hang up on him.
(Laughter) Then we might have a meeting after that meeting and actually make the decisions in the hallway afterwards when he wasn't there anymore.
So that wasn't so great for him.
And as a robotics company at Willow, we had some extra robot body parts laying around, so Dallas and his buddy Curt put together this thing, which looks kind of like Skype on a stick on wheels, which seems like a techy, silly toy, but really it's probably one of the most powerful tools that I've seen ever made for remote collaboration.
So now, if I didn't answer Dallas' email question, he could literally roll into my office, block my doorway and ask me the question again -- (Laughter) until I answered it.
And I'm not going to turn him off, right? That's kind of rude.
Not only was it good for these one-on-one communications, but also for just showing up at the company all-hands meeting.
Getting your butt in that chair and showing people that you're present and committed to your project is a big deal and can help remote collaboration a ton.
We saw this over the period of months and then years, not only at our company but at others, too.
The best thing that can happen with these systems is that it starts to feel like you're just there.
It's just you, it's just your body, and so people actually start to give these things personal space.
So when you're having a stand-up meeting, people will stand around the space just as they would if you were there in person.
That's great until there's breakdowns and it's not.
People, when they first see these robots, are like, "Wow, where's the components? There must be a camera over there," and they start poking your face.
"You're talking too softly, I'm going to turn up your volume," which is like having a coworker walk up to you and say, "You're speaking too softly, I'm going to turn up your face."
That's awkward and not OK, and so we end up having to build these new social norms around using these systems.
Similarly, as you start feeling like it's your body, you start noticing things like, "Oh, my robot is kind of short."
Dallas would say things to me -- he was six-foot tall -- and we would take him via robot to cocktail parties and things like that, as you do, and the robot was about five-foot-tall, which is close to my height.
And he would tell me, "You know, people are not really looking at me.
I feel like I'm just looking at this sea of shoulders, and it's just -- we need a taller robot."
And I told him, "Um, no.
You get to walk in my shoes for today.
You get to see what it's like to be on the shorter end of the spectrum."
And he actually ended up building a lot of empathy for that experience, which was kind of great.
So when he'd come visit in person, he no longer stood over me as he was talking to me, he would sit down and talk to me eye to eye, which was kind of a beautiful thing.
So we actually decided to look at this in the laboratory and see what others kinds of differences things like robot height would make.
And so half of the people in our study used a shorter robot, half of the people in our study used a taller robot and we actually found that the exact same person who has the exact same body and says the exact same things as someone, is more persuasive and perceived as being more credible if they're in a taller robot form.
It makes no rational sense, but that's why we study psychology.
And really, you know, the way that Cliff Nass would put this is that we're having to deal with these new technologies despite the fact that we have very old brains.
Human psychology is not changing at the same speed that tech is and so we're always playing catch-up, trying to make sense of this world where these autonomous things are running around.
Usually, things that talk are people, not machines, right?
And so we breathe a lot of meaning into things like just height of a machine, not a person, and attribute that to the person using the system.
You know, this, I think, is really important when you're thinking about robotics.
It's not so much about reinventing humans, it's more about figuring out how we extend ourselves, right?
And we end up using things in ways that are sort of surprising.
So these guys can't play pool because the robots don't have arms, but they can heckle the guys who are playing pool and that can be an important thing for team bonding, which is kind of neat.
People who get really good at operating these systems will even do things like make up new games, like robot soccer in the middle of the night, pushing the trash cans around.
But not everyone's good.
A lot of people have trouble operating these systems.
This is actually a guy who logged into the robot and his eyeball was turned 90 degrees to the left.
He didn't know that, so he ended up just bashing around the office, running into people's desks, getting super embarrassed, laughing about it -- his volume was way too high.
And this guy here in the image is telling me, "We need a robot mute button."
And by that what he really meant was we don't want it to be so disruptive.
So as a robotics company, we added some obstacle avoidance to the system.
It got a little laser range finder that could see the obstacles, and if I as a robot operator try to say, run into a chair, it wouldn't let me, it would just plan a path around, which seems like a good idea.
People did hit fewer obstacles using that system, obviously, but actually, for some of the people, it took them a lot longer to get through our obstacle course, and we wanted to know why.
It turns out that there's this important human dimension -- a personality dimension called locus of control, and people who have a strong internal locus of control, they need to be the masters of their own destiny -- really don't like giving up control to an autonomous system -- so much so that they will fight the autonomy; "If I want to hit that chair, I'm going to hit that chair."
And so they would actually suffer from having that autonomous assistance, which is an important thing for us to know as we're building increasingly autonomous, say, cars, right?
How are different people going to grapple with that loss of control?
It's going to be different depending on human dimensions.
We can't treat humans as if we're just one monolithic thing.
We vary by personality, by culture, we even vary by emotional state moment to moment, and being able to design these systems, these human-robot interaction systems, we need to take into account the human dimensions, not just the technological ones.
Along with a sense of control also comes a sense of responsibility.
And if you were a robot operator using one of these systems, this is what the interface would look like.
It looks a little bit like a video game, which can be good because that's very familiar to people, but it can also be bad because it makes people feel like it's a video game.
We had a bunch of kids over at Stanford play with the system and drive the robot around our office in Menlo Park, and the kids started saying things like, "10 points if you hit that guy over there. 20 points for that one."
And they would chase them down the hallway.
(Laughter) I told them, "Um, those are real people.
They're actually going to bleed and feel pain if you hit them."
And they'd be like, "OK, got it."
But five minutes later, they would be like, "20 points for that guy over there, he just looks like he needs to get hit."
It's a little bit like "Ender's Game," right?
There is a real world on that other side and I think it's our responsibility as people designing these interfaces to help people remember that there's real consequences to their actions and to feel a sense of responsibility when they're operating these increasingly autonomous things.
These are kind of a great example of experimenting with one possible robotic future, and I think it's pretty cool that we can extend ourselves and learn about the ways that we extend ourselves into these machines while at the same time being able to express our humanity and our personality.
We also build empathy for others in terms of being shorter, taller, faster, slower, and maybe even armless, which is kind of neat.
We also build empathy for the robots themselves.
This is one of my favorite robots.
It's called the Tweenbot.
And this guy has a little flag that says, "I'm trying to get to this intersection in Manhattan," and it's cute and rolls forward, that's it.
It doesn't know how to build a map, it doesn't know how to see the world, it just asks for help.
The nice thing about people is that it can actually depend upon the kindness of strangers.
It did make it across the park to the other side of Manhattan -- which is pretty great -- just because people would pick it up and point it in the right direction.
(Laughter) And that's great, right?
We're trying to build this human-robot world in which we can coexist and collaborate with one another, and we don't need to be fully autonomous and just do things on our own.
We actually do things together.
And to make that happen, we actually need help from people like the artists and the designers, the policy makers, the legal scholars, psychologists, sociologists, anthropologists -- we need more perspectives in the room if we're going to do the thing that Stu Card says we should do, which is invent the future that we actually want to live in.
And I think we can continue to experiment with these different robotic futures together, and in doing so, we will end up learning a lot more about ourselves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The Philippines: an idyllic country with some of the clearest water and bluest skies on the planet.
It is also the epicenter of one of the fastest-growing HIV epidemics in the world.
On the surface, it seems as if we are just a late bloomer.
However, the reasons for our current epidemic are much more complicated and may foreshadow a global resurgence of HIV.
While overall new cases of HIV continue to drop in the world, this trend may be short-lived when the next wave of more aggressive and resistant viruses arrive.
HIV has a potential to transform itself into a new and different virus every time it infects a cell.
Despite the remarkable progress we've made in reversing the epidemic, the truth is that we are just a few viral mutations away from disaster.
To appreciate the profound way in which HIV transforms itself every time it reproduces, let's make a genetic comparison.
If we look at the DNA variation among humans of different races from different continents, the actual DNA difference is only 0.1 percent.
If we look at the genetic difference between humans, great apes, and rhesus macaques, that number is seven percent.
In contrast, the genetic difference between HIV subtypes from different patients may be as much as 35 percent.
Within a person infected with HIV, the genetic difference between an infecting mother virus and subsequent daughter viruses has been shown to be as much as five percent.
This is the equivalent of a gorilla giving birth to a chimpanzee, then to an orangutan, then to a baboon, then to any random great ape within its lifetime.
There are nearly 100 subtypes of HIV, with new subtypes being discovered regularly.
HIV in the developed world is almost all of one subtype: subtype B.
Mostly everything we know and do to treat HIV is based on studies on subtype B, even though it only accounts for 12 percent of the total number of cases of HIV in the world.
But because of the profound genetic difference among different subtypes, some subtypes are more likely to become drug-resistant or progress to AIDS faster.
We discovered that the explosion of HIV cases in the Philippines is due to a shift from the Western subtype B to a more aggressive Southeast Asian subtype AE.
We are seeing younger and sicker patients with high rates of drug resistance.
Initial encroachment of this subtype is already occurring in developed countries, including Australia, Canada and the United States.
We may soon see a similar explosion of cases in these countries.
And while we think that HIV is done and that the tide has turned for it, just like with real tides, it can come right back.
In the early 1960s, malaria was on the ropes.
As the number of cases dropped, people and governments stopped paying attention.
The result was a deadly resurgence of drug-resistant malaria.
We need to think of HIV not as a single virus that we think we've figured out, but as a collection of rapidly evolving and highly unique viruses, each of which can set off the next deadly epidemic.
We are incorporating more powerful and new tools to help us detect the next deadly HIV strain, and this needs to go hand in hand with urgent research on the behavior and proper treatment of non-B subtypes.
We need to convince our governments and our funding agencies that HIV is not yet done.
Over 35 million people have died of HIV.
We are on the verge of an AIDS-free generation.
We need to pay attention.
We need to remain vigilant and follow through.
Otherwise, millions more will die.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have to tell you, it's more than a little intimidating being up here, an old American guy trying to tell Africans something new about your own continent.
But sometimes, an outsider can see things in a different way, like from the air.
That's what I found by flying low and slow all over the African continent as I photographed the spectacle of its diversity.
And I wasn't always an old guy.
(Laughter) This is me in 1979, a kid from California backpacking his way through the Ituri Forest of Zaire.
I was on a yearlong hitchhiking trip.
I had just dropped out of Stanford University, and I went from Tunis to Kisangani to Cairo and learned how to live on 10 dollars a day.
It was an amazing experience for me.
I spent about a week in this Dinka cattle camp on the banks of the Nile in South Sudan.
The Dinka taught me how to tie papyrus into a shelter, and also I observed how they had adapted their way of life around the migratory needs of their beloved cattle.
It was a like a graduate course in ecological ethnography, and I got busy taking notes with a camera.
With no money for rides, they often made the Mzungu ride on the roof of the trucks, or in this case, on the top of the train going across South Sudan.
I felt like I was riding on the back of an insect going across the enormous tapestry of Africa.
It was an incredible view from up there, but I couldn't help but think, wouldn't it be even more amazing if I could fly over that landscape like a bird?
Well, that notion stayed with me, and 20 years later, after becoming a professional photographer, I was able to talk National Geographic into doing a big story in the central Sahara, and I came back with a new kind of flying machine.
This is me piloting the world's lightest and slowest aircraft.
(Laughter) It's called a motorized paraglider.
It consists of a backpack motor and a parachute-style wing, and it flies at about 30 miles an hour.
With 10 liters of fuel, I can fly for about two hours, but what's really amazing about it is it gives me an unobstructed view, both horizontally and vertically, like a flying lawn chair.
My hitchhiker's dream of flying over Africa came true when I spotted these two camel caravans passing out in the middle of the Sahara.
The one in the foreground is carrying salt out of the desert, while the one in the background is carrying fodder for the animals heading back in.
I realized you couldn't take this kind of picture with a conventional aircraft.
An airplane moves too fast, a helicopter would be too loud with too much downdraft, and it dawned on me that this crazy little aircraft I was flying would open up a new way of seeing remote parts of the African landscape in a way that had never really been possible before.
Let me show you how it works.
(Applause) Thanks.
(Applause) This may seem a bit dangerous, but I am not some kind of adventure dude.
I'm a photographer who flies, and I only fly to take pictures.
My favorite altitude is between 200 and 500 feet, where I can see the world three-dimensionally, but also at a human scale.
I find that a lot of what I'd done over the years in Africa, you could try to do with a drone, but drones aren't really made for exploration.
They only fly for about 20 minutes of battery life and about three kilometers of range, and all you get to see is what's on a little screen.
But I like to explore.
I want to go over the horizon and find new things, find weird stuff, like this volcanic caldera in Niger.
If you look at the altimeter on my left leg, you'll see that I'm about a mile above takeoff.
Flying that high really freaked me out, but if you talk to a pro pilot, they'll tell you that altitude is actually your friend, because the higher you are, the more time you have to figure out your problems.
(Laughter) As a rank amateur, I figured this gave me more time to scream on the way back down.
(Laughter) To calm myself down, I started taking pictures, and as I did, I became rational again, and I was getting buffeted by a Harmattan wind which was coming out of the upper right hand corner of this picture, and I started to notice how it had filled the entire crater with sand.
When I got to the north of Chad, I found a different kind of volcano.
These had had their entire exteriors stripped away, and all that was left was the old core, and in the middle of the Sahara, I felt like I was seeing the earth with its living skin stripped away.
Much of the Sahara is underlain by an enormous freshwater aquifer.
When you go to the basin, sometimes you can see it leaking out.
If you were to walk through those palm groves, you could drink fresh water out of your footsteps.
But that green lake water?
Due to extreme evaporation, it's saltier than seawater and virtually lifeless.
In Niger, I was amazed to see how the locals learned how to exploit a different kind of desert spring.
Here, they mix the salty mud with spring water and spread it out in shallow ponds, and as it evaporated, it turned into a spectacle of color.
My rig is also amazing for looking at agriculture.
This picture was taken in southern Algeria, where the locals have learned how to garden in a mobile dune field by tapping into shallow groundwater.
I also loved looking at how animals have adapted to the African landscape.
This picture was taken in Lake Amboseli, just across the border from here in Kenya.
The elephants have carved the shallow lake water up into a network of little pathways, and they're spaced just enough apart that only elephants, with their long trunks, can tap into the most succulent grasses.
In Namibia, the zebra have learned how to thrive in an environment that gets no rainfall at all.
These grasses are irrigated by the dense coastal fog that blankets the area every morning.
And those bald patches out there?
They call them fairy circles, and scientists still struggle to understand what causes them.
This is Mount Visoke, with a small crater lake in its summit at 3,700 meters.
It forms the roof of the Great Rift Valley and also the border between Rwanda and Congo.
It's also the center of the reserve for the fabled mountain gorilla.
They're actually the big money-maker in Rwanda, and on this side of the border, conservation has become a huge success.
Rwanda has the highest rural population density in Africa, and I saw it in almost every corner of the country I went to.
I've heard it said that competition for land was one of the things that led to the tensions that caused the genocide of the 1990s.
I went back to South Sudan a few years ago, and it was amazing to see how much things had changed.
The Dinka were still in love with their cattle, but they had turned in their spears for Kalashnikovs.
The cattle camps from above were even more spectacular than I could have imagined, but things had changed there too.
You see those little blue dots down there?
The Dinka had adapted to the new reality, and now they covered their papyrus shelters with the tarps from UN food convoys.
In Mali, the Bozo people have learned how to thrive in the pulsating rhythms of the Niger River.
As the rainy season ends and the water subsides, they plant their rice in the fertile bottoms.
And that village in the lower right corner, that's Gao, one of the jumping off points for the major trade routes across the Sahara.
At the end of the harvest, the Bozo take the leftover rice straw and they mix it with mud to reinforce their roofs and the village mosque.
I must have flown over a dozen villages like this along the Niger River, and each one was unique, it had a different pattern.
And each mosque was like a sculptural masterpiece, and no two were alike.
I've flown all over the world, and nothing can really compare to the cultural diversity of Africa.
You see it in every country, from Morocco to Ethiopia, to South Africa, to Mozambique, to South Sudan, to Mali.
The array of environments and cultural adaptations to them is really extraordinary, and the history is pretty cool too.
From the air, I have a unique window into the earliest waves of colonial history.
This is Cyrene on the coastal mountains of Libya, that was founded by the Greeks, in 700 BC, as a learning center, and Timgad, which was founded in what's now Algeria by the Romans in 100 AD.
This was built as a retirement community for old Roman soldiers, and it amazed me to think that North Africa was once the breadbasket for the Roman Empire.
But 700 years after Timgad was built, it was buried in sand, and even then, the African climate was wetter than it is today.
The African climate continues to change, and you see it everywhere, like here in the Gorges de Ziz, where a freak rainstorm came barreling out of the Sahara and blanketed the mountains in snow.
I never thought I would see date palms in snow, but the kids that day had a great time throwing snowballs at each other.
But it made me wonder, how are Africans going to adapt to this rapidly changing climate going forward?
In a continent as dynamic and diverse as Africa, sometimes it seems that the only constant is change.
But one thing I've learned is that Africans are the ultimate improvisers, always adapting and finding a way forward.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We've had it all wrong.
Everybody.
We've had it all wrong.
The very last thing we need to do is clean the ocean.
Very last.
Yeah, there is a garbage truck of plastic entering the ocean every minute of every hour of every day.
And countless birds and animals are dying just from encountering plastic.
We are experiencing the fastest rate of extinction ever, and plastic is in the food chain.
And I'm still here, standing in front of you, telling you the very last thing we need to do is clean the ocean.
Very last.
If you were to walk into a kitchen, sink overflowing, water spilling all over the floor, soaking into the walls, you had to think fast, you're going to panic; you've got a bucket, a mop or a plunger.
What do you do first?
Why don't we turn off the tap?
It would be pointless to mop or plunge or scoop up the water if we don't turn off the tap first.
Why aren't we doing the same for the ocean?
Even if the Ocean Cleanup project, beach plastic recycling programs or any well-meaning ocean plastic company was a hundred percent successful, it would still be too little, too late.
We're trending to produce over 300 million ton of plastic this year.
Roughly eight million ton are racing to flow into the ocean to join the estimated 150 million ton already there.
Reportedly, 80 percent of ocean plastic is coming from those countries that have extreme poverty.
And if you live in the grips of poverty concerned, always, about food or shelter or a sense of security, recycling -- it's beyond your realm of imagination.
And that is exactly why I created the Plastic Bank.
We are the world's largest chain of stores for the ultra-poor, where everything in the store is available to be purchased using plastic garbage.
Everything.
School tuition.
Medical insurance.
Wi-Fi, cell phone minutes, power.
Sustainable cooking fuel, high-efficiency stoves.
And we keep wanting to add everything else that the world may need and can't afford.
Our chain of stores in Haiti are more like community centers, where one of our collectors, Lise Nasis, has the opportunity to earn a living by collecting material from door to door, from the streets, from business to business.
And at the end of her day, she gets to bring the material back to us, where we weigh it, we check it for quality, and we transfer the value into her account.
Lise now has a steady, reliable source of income.
And that value we transfer into an online account for her.
And because it's a savings account, it becomes an asset that she can borrow against.
And because it's online, she has security against robbery, and I think more importantly, she has a new sense of worth.
And even the plastic has a new sense of value.
Hm.
And that plastic we collect, and we add value to, we sort it, we remove labels, we remove caps.
We either shred it or we pack it into bales and get it ready for export.
Now, it's no different than walking over acres of diamonds.
If Lise was to walk over acres of diamonds but there was no store, no bank, no way to use the diamonds, no way to exchange them, they'd be worthless, too.
And Lise was widowed after the 2010 Haitian earthquake, left homeless without an income.
And as a result of the program, Lise can afford her two daughters' school tuition and uniforms.
Now, that plastic we sell.
We sell it to suppliers of great brands like Marks and Spencer, who have commissioned the use of social plastic in their products.
Or like Henkel, the German consumer-goods company, who are using social plastic directly into their manufacturing.
We've closed the loop in the circular economy.
Now buy shampoo or laundry detergent that has social plastic packaging, and you are indirectly contributing to the extraction of plastic from ocean-bound waterways and alleviating poverty at the same time.
And that model is completely replicable.
In So Paulo, a church sermon encourages parishioners to not just bring offering on Sunday, but the recycling, too.
We then match the church with the poor.
Or, I believe more powerfully, we could match a mosque in London with an impoverished church in Cairo.
Or like in Vancouver, with our bottle-deposit program: now any individual or any group can now return their deposit-refundable recyclables, and instead of taking back the cash, they have the opportunity to deposit that value into the account of the poor around the world.
We can now use our recycling to support and create recyclers.
One bottle deposited at home could help extract hundreds around the world.
Or, like Shell, the energy company, who's invested in our plastic-neutral program.
Plastic neutrality is like carbon-neutral.
But plastic neutrality invests in recycling infrastructure where it doesn't exist.
And it provides an incentive for the poor by providing a price increase.
Or -- like in the slums of Manila, where the smallest market with a simple scale and a phone can now accept social plastic as a new form of payment by weight, allowing them to serve more people and have their own greater social impact.
And what's common here is that social plastic is money.
Social plastic is money, a globally recognizable and tradable currency that, when used, alleviates poverty and cleans the environment at the same time.
It's not just plastic.
It's not recycled plastic, it's social plastic, a material whose value is transferred through the lives of the people who encounter it, rich and poor.
Humans have produced over eight trillion kilograms of plastic, most of it still here as waste.
Eight trillion kilograms.
Worth roughly 50 cents a kilo, we're potentially unleashing a four-trillion-dollar value.
See, I see social plastic as the Bitcoin for the earth -- (Laughter) and available for everyone.
Now the entire ecosystem is managed and supported through an online banking platform that provides for the safe, authentic transfer of value globally.
You can now deposit your recyclables in Vancouver or Berlin, and a family could withdraw building bricks or cell phone minutes in the slums of Manila.
Or Lise -- she could deposit recycling at a center in Port-au-Prince, and her mother could withdraw cooking fuel or cash across the city.
And the app adds rewards, incentives, group prizes, user rating.
We've gamified recycling.
We add fun and formality into an informal industry.
We're operating in Haiti and the Philippines.
We've selected staff and partners for Brazil.
And this year, we're committing to India and Ethiopia.
We're collecting hundreds and hundreds of tons of material.
We continue to add partners and customers, and we increase our collection volumes every day.
Now as a result of our program with Henkel, they've committed to use over 100 million kilograms of material every year.
That alone will put hundreds of millions of dollars into the hands of the poor in the emerging economies.
And so now, we can all be a part of the solution and not the pollution.
And so, OK, maybe cleaning the ocean is futile.
It might be.
But preventing ocean plastic could be humanity's richest opportunity.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In Africa we say, "God gave the white man a watch and gave the black man time."
(Laughter) I think, how is it possible for a man with so much time to tell his story in 18 minutes?
I think it will be quite a challenge for me.
Most African stories these days, they talk about famine, HIV and AIDS, poverty or war.
But my story that I would like to share with you today is the one about success.
It is about a country in the southwest of Africa called Namibia.
Namibia has got 2.1 million people, but it is only twice the size of California.
I come from a region in the remote northwest part of the country.
It's called Kunene region.
And in the center of Kunene region is the village of Sesfontein. This is where I was born.
This is where I'm coming from.
Most people that are following the story of Angelina Jolie and Brad Pitt will know where Namibia is.
They love Namibia for its beautiful dunes, that are even taller than the Empire State Building.
Wind and time have twisted our landscape into very strange shapes, and these shapes are speckled with wildlife that has become so adapted to this harsh and strange land.
I'm a Himba.
You might wonder, why are you wearing these Western clothes?
I'm a Himba and Namibian.
A Himba is one of the 29 ethnic groups in Namibia.
We live a very traditional lifestyle.
I grew up herding, looking after our livestock -- goats, sheep and cattle.
And one day, my father actually took me into the bush.
He said, "John, I want you to become a good herder.
Boy, if you are looking after our livestock and you see a cheetah eating our goat -- cheetah is very nervous -- just walk up to it.
Walk up to it and smack it on the backside."
(Laughter) "And he will let go of the goat and run off."
But then he said, "Boy, if you run into a lion, don't move.
Don't move. Stand your ground.
Puff up and just look it in the eye and it may not want to fight you."
(Laughter) But then, he said, "If you see a leopard, boy, you better run like hell."
(Laughter) "Imagine you run faster than those goats you are looking after."
In this way -- (Laughter) In this way, I actually started to learn about nature.
In addition to being an ordinary Namibian and in addition to being a Himba I'm also a trained conservationist.
And it is very important if you are in the field to know what to confront and what to run from.
I was born in 1971.
We lived under apartheid regime.
The whites could farm, graze and hunt as they wished, but we black, we were not regarded as responsible to use wildlife.
Whenever we tried to hunt, we were called poachers.
And as a result, we were fined and locked up in jail.
Between 1966 and 1990, the U.S. and Soviet interests fought for control over my country.
And you know, during war time, there are militaries, armies, that are moving around.
And the army hunted for valuable rhino horns and tusks.
They could sell these things for anything between $5,000 a kilo.
During the same year almost every Himba had a rifle.
Because it was wartime, the British .303 rifle was just all over the whole country.
Then in the same time, around 1980, we had a very big drought.
It killed almost everything that was left.
Our livestock was almost at the brink of extinction, protected as well.
We were hungry.
I remember a night when a hungry leopard went into the house of one of our neighbors and took a sleeping child out of the bed.
It's a very sad story.
But even today, that memory is still in people's minds.
They can pinpoint the exact location where this all happened.
And then, in the same year, we almost lost everything.
And my father said, "Why don't you just go to school?"
And they sent me off to school, just to get busy somewhere there.
And the year I went to school, my father actually got a job with a non-governmental organization called IRDNC, Integrated Rural Development and Nature Conservation.
They actually spend a lot of time a year in the communities.
They were trusted by the local communities like our leader, Joshua Kangombe.
Joshua Kangombe saw what was happening: wildlife disappearing, poaching was skyrocketing, and the situation seemed very hopeless.
Death and despair surrounded Joshua and our entire communities.
But then, the people from IRDNC proposed to Joshua: What if we pay people that you trust to look after wildlife?
Do you have anybody in your communities, or people, that know the bush very well and that know wildlife very well?
The headman said: "Yes. Our poachers."
"Eh? The poachers?"
"Yes. Our poachers."
And that was my father.
My father has been a poacher for quite a long time.
Instead of shooting poachers dead like they were doing elsewhere in Africa, IRDNC has helped men reclaim their abilities to manage their peoples and their rights to own and manage wildlife.
And thus, as people started feeling ownership over wildlife, wildlife numbers started coming back, and that's actually becoming a foundation for conservation in Namibia.
With independence, the whole approach of community getting involved was embraced by our new government.
Three things that actually help to build on this foundation: The very first one is honoring of tradition and being open to new ideas.
Here is our tradition: At every Himba village, there is a sacred fire.
And at this sacred fire, the spirit of our ancestors speak through the headman and advise us where to get water, where to get grazings, and where to go and hunt.
And I think this is the best way of regulating ourselves on the environment.
And here are the new ideas.
Transporting rhinos using helicopters I think is much easier than talking through a spirit that you can't see, isn't it?
And these things we were taught by outsiders.
We learned these things from outsiders.
We needed new boundaries to describe our traditional lands; we needed to learn more things like GPS just to see whether -- can GPS really reflect the true reflection of the land or is this just a thing made somewhere in the West?
And we then wanted to see whether we can match our ancestral maps with digital maps made somewhere in the world.
And through this, we actually started realizing our dreams, and we maintained honoring our traditions but we were still open to new ideas.
The second element is that we wanted to have a life, a better life where we can benefit through many things.
Most poachers, like my father, were people from our own community.
They were not people from outside.
These were our own people.
And sometimes, once they were caught, they were treated with respect, brought back into the communities and they were made part of the bigger dreams.
The best one, like my father -- I'm not campaigning for my father -- (Laughter) they were put in charge to stop others from poaching.
And when this thing started going on, we started becoming one community, renewing our connection to nature.
And that was a very strong thing in Namibia.
The last element that actually helped develop these things was the partnerships.
Our government has given legal status over our traditional lands.
The other partners that we have got is business communities.
Business communities helped bring Namibia onto the world map and they have also helped make wildlife a very valuable land use like any other land uses such as agriculture.
And most of my conservation colleagues today that you find in Namibia have been trained through the initiative, through the involvement of World Wildlife Fund in the most up-to-date conservation practices.
They have also given funding for two decades to this whole program.
And so far, with the support of World Wildlife Fund, we've been able to scale up the very small programs to national programs today.
Namibia ... or Sesfontein was no more an isolated village somewhere, hidden away in Namibia.
With these assets we are now part of the global village.
Thirty years have passed since my father's first job as a community game guard.
It's very unfortunate that he passed away and he cannot see the success as I and my children see it today.
When I finished school in 1995, there were only 20 lions in the entire Northwest -- in our area.
But today, there are more than 130 lions.
(Applause) So please, if you go to Namibia, make sure that you stay in the tents.
Don't walk out at night!
(Laughter) The black rhino -- they were almost extinct in 1982.
But today, Kunene has the largest concentration of black rhino -- free-roaming black rhinos -- in the world.
This is outside the protected area.
(Applause) The leopard -- they are now in big numbers but they are now far away from our village, because the natural plain has multiplied, like zebras, springboks and everything.
They stay very much far away because this other thing has multiplied from less than a thousand to tens of thousands of animals.
What started as very small, community rangers getting community involved, has now grown into something that we call conservancies.
Conservancies are legally instituted institutions by the government, and these are run by the communities themselves, for their benefit.
Today, we have got 60 conservancies that manage and protect over 13 million hectares of land in Namibia.
We have already reshaped conservation in the entire country.
Nowhere else in the world has community-adopted conservation at this scale.
(Applause) In 2008, conservancy generated 5.7 million dollars.
This is our new economy -- an economy based on the respect of our natural resources.
And we are able to use this money for many things: Very importantly, we put it in education.
Secondly, we put it for infrastructure. Food.
Very important as well -- we invest this money in AIDS and HIV education.
You know that Africa is being affected by these viruses.
And this is the good news from Africa that we have to shout from the rooftops.
(Applause) And now, what the world really needs is for you to help me and our partners take some of what we have learned in Namibia to other places with similar problems: places like Mongolia, or even in your own backyards, the Northern Great Plains, where buffalo and other animals have suffered and many communities are in decline.
I like that one: Namibia serving as a model to Africa, and Africa serving as a model to the United States.
(Applause) We were successful in Namibia because we dreamed of a future that was much more than just a healthy wildlife.
We knew conservation would fail if it doesn't work to improve the lives of the local communities.
So, come and talk to me about Namibia, and better yet, come to Namibia and see for yourself how we have done it.
And please, do visit our website to learn more and see how you can help CBNRM in Africa and across the world.
Imagine that you're a member of Congress.
You've worked very hard.
You've knocked on thousands of doors, sweating and shivering, depending on the season.
You've made hundreds, maybe thousands of phone calls to people you don't even know asking for their support, begging for their money.
And now you've got one of these.
It's hanging on a door in Washington, DC.
It says you're a member of Congress, that you represent the people of your state.
Now, imagine you're a conservative member of Congress.
For some of you here in Boston, Massachusetts, that's going to take a powerful imagination, all right?
(Laughter) But imagine with me that you're a conservative member of Congress.
You grew up on Milton Friedman.
You love his free markets, free enterprise and free trade.
You've watched Ronald Reagan's farewell address over and over, and you cry every time -- (Laughter) he gets to the part about the shining city on the hill, and how if the city had to have walls, the walls had doors -- doors to let in those yearning to breathe free.
You get goosebumps when you think of him telling Mr. Gorbachev to tear down his wall.
You're a conservative member of Congress, and you agree with President John F. Kennedy that America is an exceptional place.
For inspiration, you go to YouTube and you watch his speech at Rice University, September of 1962, the "moon shot" speech.
And you're amazed that he admits in that speech -- a speech of 17 minutes of pure American exceptionalism -- that some of the materials needed for the spacecraft hadn't been invented yet.
No matter.
We're going to the Moon before the decade is out.
You agree with him that the vows of this nation can be fulfilled only if we in this nation are first and therefore we intend to be first.
You've taken as your own the affect that he so embodied: that when leaders are optimistic, they're saying they believe in the people they represent.
You're a conservative member of Congress, and you believe in the precautionary principle.
You believe in data-driven analysis.
You know that climate change is real and human-caused, and you see in climate change a silent and slow-moving Sputnik moment.
One that calls for the greatness of your nation as much as the original Sputnik moment.
You are a conservative member of Congress.
You high-five the memory of Jack Kemp, and believe with him that the test of conservatism is that it works for everyone, regardless of skin color.
You're appalled by the alt-right.
You want them to have nothing to do with your brand, your party, your legacy.
You utterly reject them.
You -- (Applause) You're a conservative member of Congress.
You rise with compassion to protect the lives of the unborn, but otherwise you think the bedroom of consenting adults is a rather strange place for the government to be.
You are a conservative member of Congress.
With John Adams, you fear the mob.
Because you know, as he knew, that a mob is not able to protect liberty, not even its own.
And you're amazed at the wisdom that he and other framers had in establishing a slow, deliberative governing process -- an inherently conservative governing process.
It would serve a country.
It would grow far greater than they could ever imagine.
You are a conservative member of Congress.
You fear the fire of populist nationalism, because you know that those who play with fire can't control it.
You see their pitchforks and torches, and you know they're not good building tools.
The pitchforks and torches can tear down and burn up but they can't build up.
They can't build up the institutions and the communities so necessary to a stable and prosperous country.
You're a conservative member of Congress, and you fear the next county party convention.
You so wish for your party to be the grand opportunity party, not the grumpy old party.
(Laughter) You know that they want to hear from you some old saw about how a secret Muslim, non-American socialist took over in the White House and destroyed the country, and you know that none of that's true.
(Applause) You know that they want to hear you say that you're OK with insults, OK with "lock her up" chants and OK with policy pronouncements with all the sincerity and thoughtfulness that 140 characters can muster.
You are a conservative member of Congress.
You realize that many in your party look to some good old days that you know never existed.
They hold on, for example, to the fossils that fueled the last century of growth, but you know that better, cleaner more abundant fuels await us, and you know that that abundance can lead the world to more energy, more mobility and more freedom.
You're a conservative member of Congress.
You realize that many in your party pine for the '50s and the '60s because those were, after all, the good old days.
But you know that the Cuyahoga River was on fire back then.
You know that in Pittsburgh, street lights came on at noon because of the soot in the air.
The schools were segregated, neighborhoods redlined, that communism threatened freedom, and if you got cancer, you weren't likely to fight for long.
You're a conservative member of Congress and you want to sound like JFK at Rice, where JFK said, "It's understandable why some would have us stay where we are a little bit longer, to wait and to rest."
But everything within you says with him, this city of Houston, this state of Texas, this country of the United States was not built by those who waited and rested and wished to look behind them.
You are ready to lead.
You are ready to prove the power of free enterprise to solve challenges like climate change.
You are ready to lead.
So I've got a suggestion for you then: lead ...
now.
Step out, step up.
You know, we ask America's best to die on literal hills in places like Iraq and Afghanistan.
Is it too much to ask you to die a figurative death on a political hill in Washington, DC?
You know, at the end of your time in Washington, they're going to take this plaque off the door.
They're going to hand it to you; you're going to go home with it.
Can you imagine the emptiness of knowing that you stood for nothing, that you risk nothing, that all you did was follow fearful people to where they were already going rather than trying to lead them to a better place?
If you're not willing to lose your seat in Congress, there's really very little reason to be there.
(Applause) So here's the thing: it's not too late.
There's still time to lead.
Speak out, speak up, call lunacy what it is: lunacy.
Tell the American people that we still have moon shots in us.
Tell the folks at the county party convention, "You bet free enterprise can solve climate change."
Tell them that Milton Friedman would say to tax pollution rather than profits.
Tell them that it's OK -- no, it's a good thing that progressives would agree.
Tell them the very good news that we can bring America together to solve these challenges and to lead the world.
Tell them that free enterprise can do these things.
Tell them that America must stop the dividing, and must start the uniting.
Tell them.
Play your part before it's too late.
(Applause) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Those of you who may remember me from TEDGlobal remember me asking a few questions which still preoccupy me.
One of them was: Why is it necessary to spend six billion pounds speeding up the Eurostar train when, for about 10 percent of that money, you could have top supermodels, male and female, serving free Chateau Petrus to all the passengers for the entire duration of the journey?
You'd still have five billion left in change, and people would ask for the trains to be slowed down.
Now, you may remember me asking the question as well, a very interesting observation, that actually those strange little signs that actually flash "35" at you, occasionally accompanying a little smiley face or a frown, according to whether you're within or outside the speed limit -- those are actually more effective at preventing road accidents than speed cameras, which come with the actual threat of real punishment.
So there seems to be a strange disproportionality at work, I think, in many areas of human problem solving, particularly those which involve human psychology, which is: The tendency of the organization or the institution is to deploy as much force as possible, as much compulsion as possible, whereas actually, the tendency of the person is to be almost influenced in absolute reverse proportion to the amount of force being applied.
So there seems to be a complete disconnect here.
So what I'm asking for is the creation of a new job title -- I'll come to this a little later -- and perhaps the addition of a new word into the English language.
Because it does seem to me that large organizations including government, which is, of course, the largest organization of all, have actually become completely disconnected with what actually matters to people.
Let me give you one example of this.
You may remember this as the AOL-Time Warner merger, okay, heralded at the time as the largest single deal of all time.
It may still be, for all I know.
Now, all of you in this room, in one form or other, are probably customers of one or both of those organizations that merged.
Just interested, did anybody notice anything different as a result of this at all?
So unless you happened to be a shareholder of one or the other organizations or one of the dealmakers or lawyers involved in the no-doubt lucrative activity, you're actually engaging in a huge piece of activity that meant absolutely bugger-all to anybody, okay?
By contrast, years of marketing have taught me that if you actually want people to remember you and to appreciate what you do, the most potent things are actually very, very small.
This is from Virgin Atlantic upper-class, it's the cruet salt and pepper set.
Quite nice in itself, they're little, sort of, airplane things.
What's really, really sweet is every single person looking at these things has exactly the same mischievous thought, which is, "I reckon I can heist these."
However, you pick them up and underneath, actually engraved in the metal, are the words, "Stolen from Virgin Atlantic Airways upper-class."
(Laughter) Now, years after you remember the strategic question of whether you're flying in a 777 or an Airbus, you remember those words and that experience.
Similarly, this is from a hotel in Stockholm, the Lydmar.
Has anybody stayed there?
It's the lift, it's a series of buttons in the lift.
Nothing unusual about that at all, except that these are actually not the buttons that take you to an individual floor.
It starts with garage at the bottom, I suppose, appropriately, but it doesn't go up garage, grand floor, mezzanine, one, two, three, four.
It actually says garage, funk, rhythm and blues.
You have a series of buttons. You actually choose your lift music.
My guess is that the cost of installing this in the lift in the Lydmar Hotel in Stockholm is probably 500 to 1,000 pounds max.
It's frankly more memorable than all those millions of hotels we've all stayed at that tell you that your room has actually been recently renovated at a cost of 500,000 dollars, in order to make it resemble every other hotel room you've ever stayed in in the entire course of your life.
Now, these are trivial marketing examples, I accept.
But I was at a TED event recently and Esther Duflo, probably one of the leading experts in, effectively, the eradication of poverty in the developing world, actually spoke.
And she came across a similar example of something that fascinated me as being something which, in a business context or a government context, would simply be so trivial a solution as to seem embarrassing.
It was simply to encourage the inoculation of children by, not only making it a social event -- I think good use of behavioral economics in that, if you turn up with several other mothers to have your child inoculated, your sense of confidence is much greater than if you turn up alone.
But secondly, to incentivize that inoculation by giving a kilo of lentils to everybody who participated.
It's a tiny, tiny thing.
If you're a senior person at UNESCO and someone says, "So what are you doing to eradicate world poverty?"
you're not really confident standing up there saying, "I've got it cracked; it's the lentils," are you?
Our own sense of self-aggrandizement feels that big important problems need to have big important, and most of all, expensive solutions attached to them.
And yet, what behavioral economics shows time after time after time is in human behavioral and behavioral change there's a very, very strong disproportionality at work, that actually what changes our behavior and what changes our attitude to things is not actually proportionate to the degree of expense entailed, or the degree of force that's applied.
But everything about institutions makes them uncomfortable with that disproportionality.
So what happens in an institution is the very person who has the power to solve the problem also has a very, very large budget.
And once you have a very, very large budget, you actually look for expensive things to spend it on.
What is completely lacking is a class of people who have immense amounts of power, but no money at all.
(Laughter) It's those people I'd quite like to create in the world going forward.
Now, here's another thing that happens, which is what I call sometimes "Terminal 5 syndrome," which is that big, expensive things get big, highly-intelligent attention, and they're great, and Terminal 5 is absolutely magnificent, until you get down to the small detail, the usability, which is the signage, which is catastrophic.
You come out of "Arrive" at the airport, and you follow a big yellow sign that says "Trains" and it's in front of you.
So you walk for another hundred yards, expecting perhaps another sign, that might courteously be yellow, in front of you and saying "Trains."
No, no, no, the next one is actually blue, to your left, and says "Heathrow Express."
I mean, it could almost be rather like that scene from the film "Airplane."
A yellow sign? That's exactly what they'll be expecting.
Actually, what happens in the world increasingly -- now, all credit to the British Airport Authority.
I spoke about this before, and a brilliant person got in touch with me and said, "Okay, what can you do?"
So I did come up with five suggestions, which they are actually actioning.
One of them also being, although logically it's quite a good idea to have a lift with no up and down button in it, if it only serves two floors, it's actually bloody terrifying, okay?
Because when the door closes and there's nothing for you to do, you've actually just stepped into a Hammer film.
(Laughter) So these questions ... what is happening in the world is the big stuff, actually, is done magnificently well.
But the small stuff, what you might call the user interface, is done spectacularly badly.
But also, there seems to be a complete sort of gridlock in terms of solving these small solutions.
Because the people who can actually solve them actually are too powerful and too preoccupied with something they think of as "strategy" to actually solve them.
I tried this exercise recently, talking about banking.
They said, "Can we do an advertising campaign?
What can we do and encourage more online banking?"
I said, "It's really, really easy."
I said, "When people login to their online bank there are lots and lots of things they'd probably quite like to look at.
The last thing in the world you ever want to see is your balance."
I've got friends who actually never use their own bank cash machines because there's the risk that it might display their balance on the screen.
Why would you willingly expose yourself to bad news?
Okay, you simply wouldn't.
I said, "If you make, actually, 'Tell me my balance.' If you make that an option rather than the default, you'll find twice as many people log on to online banking, and they do it three times as often."
Let's face it, most of us -- how many of you actually check your balance before you remove cash from a cash machine?
And you're pretty rich by the standards of the world at large.
Now, interesting that no single person does that, or at least can admit to being so anal as to do it.
But what's interesting about that suggestion was that, to implement that suggestion wouldn't cost 10 million pounds; it wouldn't involve large amounts of expenditure; it would actually cost about 50 quid.
And yet, it never happens.
Because there's a fundamental disconnect, as I said, that actually, the people with the power want to do big expensive things.
And there's to some extent a big strategy myth that's prevalent in business now.
And if you think about it, it's very, very important that the strategy myth is maintained.
Because, if the board of directors convince everybody that the success of any organization is almost entirely dependent on the decisions made by the board of directors, it makes the disparity in salaries slightly more justifiable than if you actually acknowledge that quite a lot of the credit for a company's success might actually lie somewhere else, in small pieces of tactical activity.
But what is happening is that effectively -- and the invention of the spreadsheet hasn't helped this; lots of things haven't helped this -- business and government suffers from a kind of physics envy.
It wants the world to be the kind of place where the input and the change are proportionate.
It's a kind of mechanistic world that we'd all love to live in where, effectively, it sits very nicely on spreadsheets, everything is numerically expressible, and the amount you spend on something is proportionate to the scale of your success.
That's the world people actually want.
In truth, we do live in a world that science can understand.
Unfortunately, the science is probably closer to being climatology in that in many cases, very, very small changes can have disproportionately huge effects, and equally, vast areas of activity, enormous mergers, can actually accomplish absolutely bugger-all.
But it's very, very uncomfortable for us to actually acknowledge that we're living in such a world.
But what I'm saying is we could just make things a little bit better for ourselves if we looked at it in this very simple four-way approach.
That is actually strategy, and I'm not denying that strategy has a role.
You know, there are cases where you spend quite a lot of money and you accomplish quite a lot.
And I'd be wrong to dis that completely.
Moving over, we come, of course, to consultancy.
(Laughter) I thought it was very indecent of Accenture to ditch Tiger Woods in such a sort of hurried and hasty way.
I mean, Tiger surely was actually obeying the Accenture model.
He developed an interesting outsourcing model for sexual services, (Laughter) no longer tied to a single monopoly provider, in many cases, sourcing things locally, and of course, the ability to have between one and three girls delivered at any time led for better load-balancing.
So what Accenture suddenly found so unattractive about that, I'm not sure.
Then there are other things that don't cost much and achieve absolutely nothing.
That's called trivia.
But there's a fourth thing.
And the fundamental problem is we don't actually have a word for this stuff.
We don't know what to call it.
And actually we don't spend nearly enough money looking for those things, looking for those tiny things that may or may not work, but which, if they do work, can have a success absolutely out of proportion to their expense, their efforts and the disruption they cause.
So the first thing I'd like is a competition -- to anybody watching this as a film -- is to come up with a name for that stuff on the bottom right.
And the second thing, I think, is that the world needs to have people in charge of that.
That's why I call for the "Chief Detail Officer."
Every corporation should have one, and every government should have a Ministry of Detail.
The people who actually have no money, who have no extravagant budget, but who realize that actually you might achieve greater success in uptake of a government program by actually doubling the level of benefits you pay, but you'll probably achieve exactly that same effect simply by redesigning the form and writing it in comprehensible English.
And if actually we created a Ministry of Detail and business actually had Chief Detail Officers, then that fourth quadrant, which is so woefully neglected at the moment, might finally get the attention it deserves.
Thank you very much.
Chris Anderson: We're having a debate.
The debate is over the proposition: "What the world needs now is nuclear energy." True or false?
And before we have the debate, I'd like to actually take a show of hands -- on balance, right now, are you for or against this?
So those who are "yes," raise your hand. "For."
Okay, hands down.
Those who are against, raise your hands.
Okay, I'm reading that at about 75 to 25 in favor at the start.
Which means we're going to take a vote at the end and see how that shifts, if at all.
So here's the format: They're going to have six minutes each, and then after one little, quick exchange between them, I want two people on each side of this debate in the audience to have 30 seconds to make one short, crisp, pungent, powerful point.
So, in favor of the proposition, possibly shockingly, is one of, truly, the founders of the environmental movement, a long-standing TEDster, the founder of the Whole Earth Catalog, someone we all know and love, Stewart Brand.
Stewart Brand: Whoa.
(Applause) The saying is that with climate, those who know the most are the most worried.
With nuclear, those who know the most are the least worried.
A classic example is James Hansen, a NASA climatologist pushing for 350 parts per million carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
He came out with a wonderful book recently called "Storms of My Grandchildren."
And Hansen is hard over for nuclear power, as are most climatologists who are engaging this issue seriously.
This is the design situation: a planet that is facing climate change and is now half urban.
Look at the client base for this.
Five out of six of us live in the developing world.
We are moving to cities. We are moving up in the world.
And we are educating our kids, having fewer kids, basically good news all around.
But we move to cities, toward the bright lights, and one of the things that is there that we want, besides jobs, is electricity.
And if it isn't easily gotten, we'll go ahead and steal it.
This is one of the most desired things by poor people all over the world, in the cities and in the countryside.
Electricity for cities, at its best, is what's called baseload electricity.
That's where it is on all the time.
And so far there are only three major sources of that -- coal and gas, hydro-electric, which in most places is maxed-out -- and nuclear.
I would love to have something in the fourth place here, but in terms of constant, clean, scalable energy, [solar] and wind and the other renewables aren't there yet because they're inconstant.
Nuclear is and has been for 40 years.
Now, from an environmental standpoint, the main thing you want to look at is what happens to the waste from nuclear and from coal, the two major sources of electricity.
If all of your electricity in your lifetime came from nuclear, the waste from that lifetime of electricity would go in a Coke can -- a pretty heavy Coke can, about two pounds.
But one day of coal adds up to one hell of a lot of carbon dioxide in a normal one-gigawatt coal-fired plant.
Then what happens to the waste?
The nuclear waste typically goes into a dry cask storage out back of the parking lot at the reactor site because most places don't have underground storage yet.
It's just as well, because it can stay where it is.
While the carbon dioxide, vast quantities of it, gigatons, goes into the atmosphere where we can't get it back -- yet -- and where it is causing the problems that we're most concerned about.
So when you add up the greenhouse gases in the lifetime of these various energy sources, nuclear is down there with wind and hydro, below solar and way below, obviously, all the fossil fuels.
Wind is wonderful; I love wind.
I love being around these big wind generators.
But one of the things we're discovering is that wind, like solar, is an actually relatively dilute source of energy.
And so it takes a very large footprint on the land, a very large footprint in terms of materials, five to 10 times what you'd use for nuclear, and typically to get one gigawatt of electricity is on the order of 250 square miles of wind farm.
In places like Denmark and Germany, they've maxed out on wind already.
They've run out of good sites.
The power lines are getting overloaded.
And you peak out.
Likewise, with solar, especially here in California, we're discovering that the 80 solar farm schemes that are going forward want to basically bulldoze 1,000 square miles of southern California desert.
Well, as an environmentalist, we would rather that didn't happen.
It's okay on frapped-out agricultural land.
Solar's wonderful on rooftops.
But out in the landscape, one gigawatt is on the order of 50 square miles of bulldozed desert.
When you add all these things up -- Saul Griffith did the numbers and figured out what would it take to get 13 clean terawatts of energy from wind, solar and biofuels, and that area would be roughly the size of the United States, an area he refers to as "Renewistan."
A guy who's added it up all this very well is David Mackay, a physicist in England, and in his wonderful book, "Sustainable Energy," among other things, he says, "I'm not trying to be pro-nuclear. I'm just pro-arithmetic."
(Laughter) In terms of weapons, the best disarmament tool so far is nuclear energy.
We have been taking down the Russian warheads, turning it into electricity.
Ten percent of American electricity comes from decommissioned warheads.
We haven't even started the American stockpile.
I think of most interest to a TED audience would be the new generation of reactors that are very small, down around 10 to 125 megawatts.
This is one from Toshiba.
Here's one the Russians are already building that floats on a barge.
And that would be very interesting in the developing world.
Typically, these things are put in the ground.
They're referred to as nuclear batteries.
They're incredibly safe, weapons proliferation-proof and all the rest of it.
Here is a commercial version from New Mexico called the Hyperion, and another one from Oregon called NuScale.
Babcock &amp; Wilcox that make nuclear reactors, here's an integral fast reactor.
Thorium reactor that Nathan Myhrvold's involved in.
The governments of the world are going to have to decide that coals need to be made expensive, and these will go ahead.
And here's the future.
(Applause) CA: Okay. Okay.
(Applause) So arguing against, a man who's been at the nitty, gritty heart of the energy debate and the climate change debate for years.
In 2000, he discovered that soot was probably the second leading cause of global warming, after CO2.
His team have been making detailed calculations of the relative impacts of different energy sources.
His first time at TED, possibly a disadvantage -- we shall see -- from Stanford, Professor Mark Jacobson. Good luck.
Mark Jacobson: Thank you.
(Applause) So my premise here is that nuclear energy puts out more carbon dioxide, puts out more air pollutants, enhances mortality more and takes longer to put up than real renewable energy systems, namely wind, solar, geothermal power, hydro-tidal wave power.
And it also enhances nuclear weapons proliferation.
So let's start just by looking at the CO2 emissions from the life cycle.
CO2e emissions are equivalent emissions of all the greenhouse gases and particles that cause warming and converted to CO2.
And if you look, wind and concentrated solar have the lowest CO2 emissions, if you look at the graph.
Nuclear -- there are two bars here.
One is a low estimate, and one is a high estimate.
The low estimate is the nuclear energy industry estimate of nuclear.
The high is the average of 103 scientific, peer-reviewed studies.
And this is just the CO2 from the life cycle.
If we look at the delays, it takes between 10 and 19 years to put up a nuclear power plant from planning to operation.
This includes about three and a half to six years for a site permit.
and another two and a half to four years for a construction permit and issue, and then four to nine years for actual construction.
And in China, right now, they're putting up five gigawatts of nuclear.
And the average, just for the construction time of these, is 7.1 years on top of any planning times.
While you're waiting around for your nuclear, you have to run the regular electric power grid, which is mostly coal in the United States and around the world.
And the chart here shows the difference between the emissions from the regular grid, resulting if you use nuclear, or anything else, versus wind, CSP or photovoltaics.
Wind takes about two to five years on average, same as concentrated solar and photovoltaics.
So the difference is the opportunity cost of using nuclear versus wind, or something else.
So if you add these two together, alone, you can see a separation that nuclear puts out at least nine to 17 times more CO2 equivalent emissions than wind energy.
And this doesn't even account for the footprint on the ground.
If you look at the air pollution health effects, this is the number of deaths per year in 2020 just from vehicle exhaust.
Let's say we converted all the vehicles in the United States to battery electric vehicles, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles or flex fuel vehicles run on E85.
Well, right now in the United States, 50 to 100,000 people die per year from air pollution, and vehicles are about 25,000 of those.
In 2020, the number will go down to 15,000 due to improvements.
And so, on the right, you see gasoline emissions, the death rates of 2020.
If you go to corn or cellulosic ethanol, you'd actually increase the death rate slightly.
If you go to nuclear, you do get a big reduction, but it's not as much as with wind and concentrated solar.
Now if you consider the fact that nuclear weapons proliferation is associated with nuclear energy proliferation, because we know for example, India and Pakistan developed nuclear weapons secretly by enriching uranium in nuclear energy facilities.
North Korea did that to some extent.
Iran is doing that right now.
And Venezuela would be doing it if they started with their nuclear energy facilities.
If you do a large scale expansion of nuclear energy across the world, and as a result there was just one nuclear bomb created that was used to destroy a city such as Mumbai or some other big city, megacity, the additional death rates due to this averaged over 30 years and then scaled to the population of the U.S.
would be this.
So, do we need this?
The next thing is: What about the footprint? Stewart mentioned the footprint.
Actually, the footprint on the ground for wind is by far the smallest of any energy source in the world.
That, because the footprint, as you can see, is just the pole touching the ground.
And you can power the entire U.S. vehicle fleet with 73,000 to 145,000 five-megawatt wind turbines.
That would take between one and three square kilometers of footprint on the ground, entirely.
The spacing is something else.
That's the footprint that is always being confused.
People confuse footprint with spacing.
As you can see from these pictures, the spacing between can be used for multiple purposes including agricultural land, range land or open space.
Over the ocean, it's not even land.
Now if we look at nuclear -- (Laughter) With nuclear, what do we have?
We have facilities around there. You also have a buffer zone that's 17 square kilometers.
And you have the uranium mining that you have to deal with.
Now if we go to the area, lots is worse than nuclear or wind.
For example, cellulosic ethanol, to power the entire U.S. vehicle fleet, this is how much land you would need.
That's cellulosic, second generation biofuels from prairie grass.
Here's corn ethanol. It's smaller.
This is based on ranges from data, but if you look at nuclear, it would be the size of Rhode Island to power the U.S. vehicle fleet.
For wind, there's a larger area, but much smaller footprint.
And of course, with wind, you could put it all over the East Coast, offshore theoretically, or you can split it up.
And now, if you go back to looking at geothermal, it's even smaller than both, and solar is slightly larger than the nuclear spacing, but it's still pretty small.
And this is to power the entire U.S. vehicle fleet.
To power the entire world with 50 percent wind, you would need about one percent of world land.
Matching the reliability, base load is actually irrelevant.
We want to match the hour-by-hour power supply.
You can do that by combining renewables.
This is from real data in California, looking at wind data and solar data.
And it considers just using existing hydro to match the hour-by-hour power demand.
Here are the world wind resources.
There's five to 10 times more wind available worldwide than we need for all the world.
So then here's the final ranking.
And one last slide I just want to show. This is the choice: You can either have wind or nuclear.
If you use wind, you guarantee ice will last.
Nuclear, the time lag alone will allow the Arctic to melt and other places to melt more.
And we can guarantee a clean, blue sky or an uncertain future with nuclear power.
(Applause) CA: All right.
So while they're having their comebacks on each other -- and yours is slightly short because you slightly overran -- I need two people from either side.
So if you're for this, if you're for nuclear power, put up two hands.
If you're against, put up one.
And I want two of each for the mics.
Now then, you guys have -- you have a minute comeback on him to pick up a point he said, challenge it, whatever.
SB: I think a point of difference we're having, Mark, has to do with weapons and energy.
These diagrams that show that nuclear is somehow putting out a lot of greenhouse gases -- a lot of those studies include, "Well of course war will be inevitable and therefore we'll have cities burning and stuff like that," which is kind of finessing it a little bit, I think.
The reality is that there's, what, 21 nations that have nuclear power?
Of those, seven have nuclear weapons.
In every case, they got the weapons before they got the nuclear power.
There are two nations, North Korea and Israel, that have nuclear weapons and don't have nuclear power at all.
The places that we would most like to have really clean energy occur are China, India, Europe, North America, all of which have sorted out their situation in relation to nuclear weapons.
So that leaves a couple of places like Iran, maybe Venezuela, that you would like to have very close surveillance of anything that goes on with fissile stuff.
Pushing ahead with nuclear power will mean we really know where all of the fissile material is, and we can move toward zero weapons left, once we know all that.
CA: Mark, 30 seconds, either on that or on anything Stewart said.
MJ: Well we know India and Pakistan had nuclear energy first, and then they developed nuclear weapons secretly in the factories.
So the other thing is, we don't need nuclear energy.
There's plenty of solar and wind.
You can make it reliable, as I showed with that diagram.
That's from real data.
And this is an ongoing research. This is not rocket science.
Solving the world's problems can be done, if you really put your mind to it and use clean, renewable energy.
There's absolutely no need for nuclear power.
(Applause) CA: We need someone for.
Rod Beckstrom: Thank you Chris. I'm Rod Beckstrom, CEO of ICANN.
I've been involved in global warming policy since 1994, when I joined the board of Environmental Defense Fund that was one of the crafters of the Kyoto Protocol.
And I want to support Stewart Brand's position.
I've come around in the last 10 years.
I used to be against nuclear power.
I'm now supporting Stewart's position, softly, from a risk-management standpoint, agreeing that the risks of overheating the planet outweigh the risk of nuclear incident, which certainly is possible and is a very real problem.
However, I think there may be a win-win solution here where both parties can win this debate, and that is, we face a situation where it's carbon caps on this planet or die.
And in the United States Senate, we need bipartisan support -- only one or two votes are needed -- to move global warming through the Senate, and this room can help.
So if we get that through, then Mark will solve these problems. Thanks Chris.
CA: Thank you Rod Beckstrom. Against.
David Fanton: Hi, I'm David Fanton. I just want to say a couple quick things.
The first is: be aware of the propaganda.
The propaganda from the industry has been very, very strong.
And we have not had the other side of the argument fully aired so that people can draw their own conclusions.
Be very aware of the propaganda.
Secondly, think about this.
If we build all these nuclear power plants, all that waste is going to be on hundreds, if not thousands, of trucks and trains, moving through this country every day.
Tell me they're not going to have accidents.
Tell me that those accidents aren't going to put material into the environment that is poisonous for hundreds of thousands of years.
And then tell me that each and every one of those trucks and trains isn't a potential terrorist target.
CA: Thank you.
For.
Anyone else for? Go.
Alex: Hi, I'm Alex. I just wanted to say, I'm, first of all, renewable energy's biggest fan.
I've got solar PV on my roof.
I've got a hydro conversion at a watermill that I own.
And I'm, you know, very much "pro" that kind of stuff.
However, there's a basic arithmetic problem here.
The capability of the sun shining, the wind blowing and the rain falling, simply isn't enough to add up.
So if we want to keep the lights on, we actually need a solution which is going to keep generating all of the time.
I campaigned against nuclear weapons in the '80s, and I continue to do so now.
But we've got an opportunity to recycle them into something more useful that enables us to get energy all of the time.
And, ultimately, the arithmetic problem isn't going to go away.
We're not going to get enough energy from renewables alone.
We need a solution that generates all of the time.
If we're going to keep the lights on, nuclear is that solution.
CA: Thank you.
Anyone else against?
Man: The last person who was in favor made the premise that we don't have enough alternative renewable resources.
And our "against" proponent up here made it very clear that we actually do.
And so the fallacy that we need this resource and we can actually make it in a time frame that is meaningful is not possible.
I will also add one other thing.
Ray Kurzweil and all the other talks -- we know that the stick is going up exponentially.
So you can't look at state-of-the-art technologies in renewables and say, "That's all we have."
Because five years from now, it will blow you away what we'll actually have as alternatives to this horrible, disastrous nuclear power.
CA: Point well made. Thank you.
(Applause) So each of you has really just a couple sentences -- 30 seconds each to sum up.
Your final pitch, Stewart.
SB: I loved your "It all balances out" chart that you had there.
It was a sunny day and a windy night.
And just now in England they had a cold spell.
All of the wind in the entire country shut down for a week.
None of those things were stirring.
And as usual, they had to buy nuclear power from France.
Two gigawatts comes through the Chunnel.
This keeps happening.
I used to worry about the 10,000 year factor.
And the fact is, we're going to use the nuclear waste we have for fuel in the fourth generation of reactors that are coming along.
And especially the small reactors need to go forward.
I heard from Nathan Myhrvold -- and I think here's the action point -- it'll take an act of Congress to make the Nuclear Regulatory Commission start moving quickly on these small reactors, which we need very much, here and in the world.
(Applause) MJ: So we've analyzed the hour-by-hour power demand and supply, looking at solar, wind, using data for California.
And you can match that demand, hour-by-hour, for the whole year almost.
Now, with regard to the resources, we've developed the first wind map of the world, from data alone, at 80 meters.
We know what the wind resources are. You can cover 15 percent.
Fifteen percent of the entire U.S.
has wind at fast enough speeds to be cost-competitive.
And there's much more solar than there is wind.
There's plenty of resource. You can make it reliable.
CA: Okay. So, thank you, Mark.
(Applause) So if you were in Palm Springs ...
(Laughter) (Applause) Shameless. Shameless. Shameless.
(Applause) So, people of the TED community, I put it to you that what the world needs now is nuclear energy.
All those in favor, raise your hands.
(Shouts) And all those against.
Ooooh.
Now that is -- my take on that ...
Just put up ... Hands up, people who changed their minds during the debate, who voted differently.
Those of you who changed your mind in favor of "for" put your hands up.
Okay. So here's the read on it.
Both people won supporters, but on my count, the mood of the TED community shifted from about 75 to 25 to about 65 to 35 in favor, in favor.
You both won. I congratulate both of you.
Thank you for that.
(Applause)
This is the venue where, as a young man, some of the music that I wrote was first performed.
It was, remarkably, a pretty good sounding room.
With all the uneven walls and all the crap everywhere, it actually sounded pretty good.
This is a song that was recorded there.
(Music) This is not Talking Heads, in the picture anyway.
(Music: "A Clean Break (Let's Work)" by Talking Heads) So the nature of the room meant that words could be understood.
The lyrics of the songs could be pretty much understood.
The sound system was kind of decent.
And there wasn't a lot of reverberation in the room.
So the rhythms could be pretty intact too, pretty concise.
Other places around the country had similar rooms.
This is Tootsie's Orchid Lounge in Nashville.
The music was in some ways different, but in structure and form, very much the same.
The clientele behavior was very much the same too.
And so the bands at Tootsie's or at CBGB's had to play loud enough -- the volume had to be loud enough to overcome people falling down, shouting out and doing whatever else they were doing.
Since then, I've played other places that are much nicer.
I've played the Disney Hall here and Carnegie Hall and places like that.
And it's been very exciting.
But I also noticed that sometimes the music that I had written, or was writing at the time, didn't sound all that great in some of those halls.
We managed, but sometimes those halls didn't seem exactly suited to the music I was making or had made.
So I asked myself: Do I write stuff for specific rooms?
Do I have a place, a venue, in mind when I write?
Is that a kind of model for creativity?
Do we all make things with a venue, a context, in mind?
Okay, Africa.
(Music: "Wenlenga" / Various artists) Most of the popular music that we know now has a big part of its roots in West Africa.
And the music there, I would say, the instruments, the intricate rhythms, the way it's played, the setting, the context, it's all perfect. It all works perfect.
The music works perfectly in that setting.
There's no big room to create reverberation and confuse the rhythms.
The instruments are loud enough that they can be heard without amplification, etc., etc.
It's no accident.
It's perfect for that particular context.
And it would be a mess in a context like this. This is a gothic cathedral.
(Music: "Spem In Alium" by Thomas Tallis) In a gothic cathedral, this kind of music is perfect.
It doesn't change key, the notes are long, there's almost no rhythm whatsoever, and the room flatters the music.
It actually improves it.
This is the room that Bach wrote some of his music for. This is the organ.
It's not as big as a gothic cathedral, so he can write things that are a little bit more intricate.
He can, very innovatively, actually change keys without risking huge dissonances.
(Music: "Fantasia On Jesu, Mein Freunde" by Johann S. Bach) This is a little bit later.
This is the kind of rooms that Mozart wrote in.
I think we're in like 1770, somewhere around there.
They're smaller, even less reverberant, so he can write really frilly music that's very intricate -- and it works.
(Music: "Sonata in F," KV 13, by Wolfgang A. Mozart) It fits the room perfectly.
This is La Scala.
It's around the same time, I think it was built around 1776.
People in the audience in these opera houses, when they were built, they used to yell out to one another.
They used to eat, drink and yell out to people on the stage, just like they do at CBGB's and places like that.
If they liked an aria, they would holler and suggest that it be done again as an encore, not at the end of the show, but immediately.
(Laughter) And well, that was an opera experience.
This is the opera house that Wagner built for himself.
And the size of the room is not that big.
It's smaller than this.
But Wagner made an innovation.
He wanted a bigger band.
He wanted a little more bombast, so he increased the size of the orchestra pit so he could get more low-end instruments in there.
(Music: "Lohengrin / Prelude to Act III" by Richard Wagner) Okay.
This is Carnegie Hall.
Obviously, this kind of thing became popular.
The halls got bigger. Carnegie Hall's fair-sized.
It's larger than some of the other symphony halls.
And they're a lot more reverberant than La Scala.
Around the same, according to Alex Ross who writes for the New Yorker, this kind of rule came into effect that audiences had to be quiet -- no more eating, drinking and yelling at the stage, or gossiping with one another during the show.
They had to be very quiet.
So those two things combined meant that a different kind of music worked best in these kind of halls.
It meant that there could be extreme dynamics, which there weren't in some of these other kinds of music.
Quiet parts could be heard that would have been drowned out by all the gossiping and shouting.
But because of the reverberation in those rooms like Carnegie Hall, the music had to be maybe a little less rhythmic and a little more textural.
(Music: "Symphony No. 8 in E Flat Major" by Gustav Mahler) This is Mahler.
It looks like Bob Dylan, but it's Mahler.
That was Bob's last record, yeah.
(Laughter) Popular music, coming along at the same time.
This is a jazz band.
According to Scott Joplin, the bands were playing on riverboats and clubs.
Again, it's noisy. They're playing for dancers.
There's certain sections of the song -- the songs had different sections that the dancers really liked.
And they'd say, "Play that part again."
Well, there's only so many times you can play the same section of a song over and over again for the dancers.
So the bands started to improvise new melodies.
And a new form of music was born.
(Music: "Royal Garden Blues" by W.C. Handy / Ethel Waters) These are played mainly in small rooms.
People are dancing, shouting and drinking.
So the music has to be loud enough to be heard above that.
Same thing goes true for -- that's the beginning of the century -- for the whole of 20th-century popular music, whether it's rock or Latin music or whatever.
[Live music] doesn't really change that much.
It changes about a third of the way into the 20th century, when this became one of the primary venues for music.
And this was one way that the music got there.
Microphones enabled singers, in particular, and musicians and composers, to completely change the kind of music that they were writing.
So far, a lot of the stuff that was on the radio was live music, but singers, like Frank Sinatra, could use the mic and do things that they could never do without a microphone.
Other singers after him went even further.
(Music: "My Funny Valentine" by Chet Baker) This is Chet Baker.
And this kind of thing would have been impossible without a microphone.
It would have been impossible without recorded music as well.
And he's singing right into your ear.
He's whispering into your ears.
The effect is just electric.
It's like the guy is sitting next to you, whispering who knows what into your ear.
So at this point, music diverged.
There's live music, and there's recorded music.
And they no longer have to be exactly the same.
Now there's venues like this, a discotheque, and there's jukeboxes in bars, where you don't even need to have a band.
There doesn't need to be any live performing musicians whatsoever, and the sound systems are good.
People began to make music specifically for discos and for those sound systems.
And, as with jazz, the dancers liked certain sections more than they did others.
So the early hip-hop guys would loop certain sections.
(Music: "Rapper's Delight" by The Sugarhill Gang) The MC would improvise lyrics in the same way that the jazz players would improvise melodies.
And another new form of music was born.
Live performance, when it was incredibly successful, ended up in what is probably, acoustically, the worst sounding venues on the planet: sports stadiums, basketball arenas and hockey arenas.
Musicians who ended up there did the best they could.
They wrote what is now called arena rock, which is medium-speed ballads.
(Music: "I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For" by U2) They did the best they could given that this is what they're writing for.
The tempos are medium. It sounds big.
It's more a social situation than a musical situation.
And in some ways, the music that they're writing for this place works perfectly.
So there's more new venues.
One of the new ones is the automobile.
I grew up with a radio in a car.
But now that's evolved into something else.
The car is a whole venue.
(Music: "Who U Wit" by Lil' Jon &amp; the East Side Boyz) The music that, I would say, is written for automobile sound systems works perfectly on it.
It might not be what you want to listen to at home, but it works great in the car -- has a huge frequency spectrum, you know, big bass and high-end and the voice kind of stuck in the middle.
Automobile music, you can share with your friends.
There's one other kind of new venue, the private MP3 player.
Presumably, this is just for Christian music.
(Laughter) And in some ways it's like Carnegie Hall, or when the audience had to hush up, because you can now hear every single detail.
In other ways, it's more like the West African music because if the music in an MP3 player gets too quiet, you turn it up, and the next minute, your ears are blasted out by a louder passage.
So that doesn't really work.
I think pop music, mainly, it's written today, to some extent, is written for these kind of players, for this kind of personal experience where you can hear extreme detail, but the dynamic doesn't change that much.
So I asked myself: Okay, is this a model for creation, this adaptation that we do?
And does it happen anywhere else?
Well, according to David Attenborough and some other people, birds do it too -- that the birds in the canopy, where the foliage is dense, their calls tend to be high-pitched, short and repetitive.
And the birds on the floor tend to have lower pitched calls, so that they don't get distorted when they bounce off the forest floor.
And birds like this Savannah sparrow, they tend to have a buzzing (Sound clip: Savannah sparrow song) type call.
And it turns out that a sound like this is the most energy efficient and practical way to transmit their call across the fields and savannahs.
Other birds, like this tanager, have adapted within the same species.
The tananger on the East Coast of the United States, where the forests are a little denser, has one kind of call, and the tananger on the other side, on the west (Sound clip: Scarlet tanager song) has a different kind of call.
(Sound clip: Scarlet tanager song) So birds do it too.
And I thought: Well, if this is a model for creation, if we make music, primarily the form at least, to fit these contexts, and if we make art to fit gallery walls or museum walls, and if we write software to fit existing operating systems, is that how it works?
Yeah. I think it's evolutionary.
It's adaptive.
But the pleasure and the passion and the joy is still there.
This is a reverse view of things from the kind of traditional Romantic view.
The Romantic view is that first comes the passion and then the outpouring of emotion, and then somehow it gets shaped into something.
And I'm saying, well, the passion's still there, but the vessel that it's going to be injected into and poured into, that is instinctively and intuitively created first.
We already know where that passion is going.
But this conflict of views is kind of interesting.
The writer, Thomas Frank, says that this might be a kind of explanation why some voters vote against their best interests, that voters, like a lot of us, assume, that if they hear something that sounds like it's sincere, that it's coming from the gut, that it's passionate, that it's more authentic.
And they'll vote for that.
So that, if somebody can fake sincerity, if they can fake passion, they stand a better chance of being selected in that way, which seems a little dangerous.
I'm saying the two, the passion, the joy, are not mutually exclusive.
Maybe what the world needs now is for us to realize that we are like the birds.
We adapt.
We sing.
And like the birds, the joy is still there, even though we have changed what we do to fit the context.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So since I was here last in '06, we discovered that global climate change is turning out to be a pretty serious issue, so we covered that fairly extensively in Skeptic magazine.
We investigate all kinds of scientific and quasi-scientific controversies, but it turns out we don't have to worry about any of this because the world's going to end in 2012.
Another update: You will recall I introduced you guys to the Quadro Tracker.
It's like a water dowsing device.
It's just a hollow piece of plastic with an antenna that swivels around.
And you walk around, and it points to things.
Like if you're looking for marijuana in students' lockers, it'll point right to somebody.
Oh, sorry. (Laughter) This particular one that was given to me finds golf balls, especially if you're at a golf course and you check under enough bushes.
Well, under the category of "What's the harm of silly stuff like this?"
this device, the ADE 651, was sold to the Iraqi government for 40,000 dollars apiece.
It's just like this one, completely worthless, in which it allegedly worked by "electrostatic magnetic ion attraction," which translates to "pseudoscientific baloney" -- would be the nice word -- in which you string together a bunch of words that sound good, but it does absolutely nothing.
In this case, at trespass points, allowing people to go through because your little tracker device said they were okay, actually cost lives.
So there is a danger to pseudoscience, in believing in this sort of thing.
So what I want to talk about today is belief.
I want to believe, and you do too.
And in fact, I think my thesis here is that belief is the natural state of things.
It is the default option. We just believe.
We believe all sorts of things.
Belief is natural; disbelief, skepticism, science, is not natural.
It's more difficult.
It's uncomfortable to not believe things.
So like Fox Mulder on "X-Files," who wants to believe in UFOs? Well, we all do, and the reason for that is because we have a belief engine in our brains.
Essentially, we are pattern-seeking primates.
We connect the dots: A is connected to B; B is connected to C.
And sometimes A really is connected to B, and that's called association learning.
We find patterns, we make those connections, whether it's Pavlov's dog here associating the sound of the bell with the food, and then he salivates to the sound of the bell, or whether it's a Skinnerian rat, in which he's having an association between his behavior and a reward for it, and therefore he repeats the behavior.
In fact, what Skinner discovered is that, if you put a pigeon in a box like this, and he has to press one of these two keys, and he tries to figure out what the pattern is, and you give him a little reward in the hopper box there -- if you just randomly assign rewards such that there is no pattern, they will figure out any kind of pattern.
And whatever they were doing just before they got the reward, they repeat that particular pattern.
Sometimes it was even spinning around twice counterclockwise, once clockwise and peck the key twice.
And that's called superstition, and that, I'm afraid, we will always have with us.
I call this process "patternicity" -- that is, the tendency to find meaningful patterns in both meaningful and meaningless noise.
When we do this process, we make two types of errors.
A Type I error, or false positive, is believing a pattern is real when it's not.
Our second type of error is a false negative.
A Type II error is not believing a pattern is real when it is.
So let's do a thought experiment.
You are a hominid three million years ago walking on the plains of Africa.
Your name is Lucy, okay?
And you hear a rustle in the grass.
Is it a dangerous predator, or is it just the wind?
Your next decision could be the most important one of your life.
Well, if you think that the rustle in the grass is a dangerous predator and it turns out it's just the wind, you've made an error in cognition, made a Type I error, false positive.
But no harm. You just move away.
You're more cautious. You're more vigilant.
On the other hand, if you believe that the rustle in the grass is just the wind, and it turns out it's a dangerous predator, you're lunch.
You've just won a Darwin award.
You've been taken out of the gene pool.
Now the problem here is that patternicities will occur whenever the cost of making a Type I error is less than the cost of making a Type II error.
This is the only equation in the talk by the way.
We have a pattern detection problem that is assessing the difference between a Type I and a Type II error is highly problematic, especially in split-second, life-and-death situations.
So the default position is just: Believe all patterns are real -- All rustles in the grass are dangerous predators and not just the wind.
And so I think that we evolved ...
there was a natural selection for the propensity for our belief engines, our pattern-seeking brain processes, to always find meaningful patterns and infuse them with these sort of predatory or intentional agencies that I'll come back to.
So for example, what do you see here?
It's a horse head, that's right.
It looks like a horse. It must be a horse.
That's a pattern.
And is it really a horse?
Or is it more like a frog?
See, our pattern detection device, which appears to be located in the anterior cingulate cortex -- it's our little detection device there -- can be easily fooled, and this is the problem.
For example, what do you see here?
Yes, of course, it's a cow.
Once I prime the brain -- it's called cognitive priming -- once I prime the brain to see it, it pops back out again even without the pattern that I've imposed on it.
And what do you see here?
Some people see a Dalmatian dog.
Yes, there it is. And there's the prime.
So when I go back without the prime, your brain already has the model so you can see it again.
What do you see here?
Planet Saturn. Yes, that's good.
How about here?
Just shout out anything you see.
That's a good audience, Chris.
Because there's nothing in this. Well, allegedly there's nothing.
This is an experiment done by Jennifer Whitson at U.T. Austin on corporate environments and whether feelings of uncertainty and out of control makes people see illusory patterns.
That is, almost everybody sees the planet Saturn.
People that are put in a condition of feeling out of control are more likely to see something in this, which is allegedly patternless.
In other words, the propensity to find these patterns goes up when there's a lack of control.
For example, baseball players are notoriously superstitious when they're batting, but not so much when they're fielding.
Because fielders are successful 90 to 95 percent of the time.
The best batters fail seven out of 10 times.
So their superstitions, their patternicities, are all associated with feelings of lack of control and so forth.
What do you see in this particular one here, in this field?
Anybody see an object there?
There actually is something here, but it's degraded.
While you're thinking about that, this was an experiment done by Susan Blackmore, a psychologist in England, who showed subjects this degraded image and then ran a correlation between their scores on an ESP test: How much did they believe in the paranormal, supernatural, angels and so forth.
And those who scored high on the ESP scale, tended to not only see more patterns in the degraded images but incorrect patterns.
Here is what you show subjects.
The fish is degraded 20 percent, 50 percent and then the one I showed you, 70 percent.
A similar experiment was done by another [Swiss] psychologist named Peter Brugger, who found significantly more meaningful patterns were perceived on the right hemisphere, via the left visual field, than the left hemisphere.
So if you present subjects the images such that it's going to end up on the right hemisphere instead of the left, then they're more likely to see patterns than if you put it on the left hemisphere.
Our right hemisphere appears to be where a lot of this patternicity occurs.
So what we're trying to do is bore into the brain to see where all this happens.
Brugger and his colleague, Christine Mohr, gave subjects L-DOPA.
L-DOPA's a drug, as you know, given for treating Parkinson's disease, which is related to a decrease in dopamine.
L-DOPA increases dopamine.
An increase of dopamine caused subjects to see more patterns than those that did not receive the dopamine.
So dopamine appears to be the drug associated with patternicity.
In fact, neuroleptic drugs that are used to eliminate psychotic behavior, things like paranoia, delusions and hallucinations, these are patternicities.
They're incorrect patterns. They're false positives. They're Type I errors.
And if you give them drugs that are dopamine antagonists, they go away.
That is, you decrease the amount of dopamine, and their tendency to see patterns like that decreases.
On the other hand, amphetamines like cocaine are dopamine agonists.
They increase the amount of dopamine.
So you're more likely to feel in a euphoric state, creativity, find more patterns.
In fact, I saw Robin Williams recently talk about how he thought he was much funnier when he was doing cocaine, when he had that issue, than now.
So perhaps more dopamine is related to more creativity.
Dopamine, I think, changes our signal-to-noise ratio.
That is, how accurate we are in finding patterns.
If it's too low, you're more likely to make too many Type II errors.
You miss the real patterns. You don't want to be too skeptical.
If you're too skeptical, you'll miss the really interesting good ideas.
Just right, you're creative, and yet you don't fall for too much baloney.
Too high and maybe you see patterns everywhere.
Every time somebody looks at you, you think people are staring at you.
You think people are talking about you.
And if you go too far on that, that's just simply labeled as madness.
It's a distinction perhaps we might make between two Nobel laureates, Richard Feynman and John Nash.
One sees maybe just the right number of patterns to win a Nobel Prize.
The other one also, but maybe too many patterns.
And we then call that schizophrenia.
So the signal-to-noise ratio then presents us with a pattern-detection problem.
And of course you all know exactly what this is, right?
And what pattern do you see here?
Again, I'm putting your anterior cingulate cortex to the test here, causing you conflicting pattern detections.
You know, of course, this is Via Uno shoes.
These are sandals.
Pretty sexy feet, I must say.
Maybe a little Photoshopped.
And of course, the ambiguous figures that seem to flip-flop back and forth.
It turns out what you're thinking about a lot influences what you tend to see.
And you see the lamp here, I know.
Because the lights on here.
Of course, thanks to the environmentalist movement we're all sensitive to the plight of marine mammals.
So what you see in this particular ambiguous figure is, of course, the dolphins, right?
You see a dolphin here, and there's a dolphin, and there's a dolphin.
That's a dolphin tail there, guys.
(Laughter) If we can give you conflicting data, again, your ACC is going to be going into hyperdrive.
If you look down here, it's fine. If you look up here, then you get conflicting data.
And then we have to flip the image for you to see that it's a set up.
The impossible crate illusion.
It's easy to fool the brain in 2D.
So you say, "Aw, come on Shermer, anybody can do that in a Psych 101 text with an illusion like that."
Well here's the late, great Jerry Andrus' "impossible crate" illusion in 3D, in which Jerry is standing inside the impossible crate.
And he was kind enough to post this and give us the reveal.
Of course, camera angle is everything. The photographer is over there, and this board appears to overlap with this one, and this one with that one, and so on.
But even when I take it away, the illusion is so powerful because of how are brains are wired to find those certain kinds of patterns.
This is a fairly new one that throws us off because of the conflicting patterns of comparing this angle with that angle.
In fact, it's the exact same picture side by side.
So what you're doing is comparing that angle instead of with this one, but with that one.
And so your brain is fooled.
Yet again, your pattern detection devices are fooled.
Faces are easy to see because we have an additional evolved facial recognition software in our temporal lobes.
Here's some faces on the side of a rock.
I'm actually not even sure if this is -- this might be Photoshopped.
But anyway, the point is still made.
Now which one of these looks odd to you?
In a quick reaction, which one looks odd?
The one on the left. Okay. So I'll rotate it so it'll be the one on the right.
And you are correct.
A fairly famous illusion -- it was first done with Margaret Thatcher.
Now, they trade up the politicians every time.
Well, why is this happening?
Well, we know exactly where it happens, in the temporal lobe, right across, sort of above your ear there, in a little structure called the fusiform gyrus.
And there's two types of cells that do this, that record facial features either globally, or specifically these large, rapid-firing cells, first look at the general face.
So you recognize Obama immediately.
And then you notice something quite a little bit odd about the eyes and the mouth.
Especially when they're upside down, you're engaging that general facial recognition software there.
Now I said back in our little thought experiment, you're a hominid walking on the plains of Africa.
Is it just the wind or a dangerous predator?
What's the difference between those?
Well, the wind is inanimate; the dangerous predator is an intentional agent.
And I call this process agenticity.
That is the tendency to infuse patterns with meaning, intention and agency, often invisible beings from the top down.
This is an idea that we got from a fellow TEDster here, Dan Dennett, who talked about taking the intentional stance.
So it's a type of that expanded to explain, I think, a lot of different things: souls, spirits, ghosts, gods, demons, angels, aliens, intelligent designers, government conspiracists and all manner of invisible agents with power and intention, are believed to haunt our world and control our lives.
I think it's the basis of animism and polytheism and monotheism.
It's the belief that aliens are somehow more advanced than us, more moral than us, and the narratives always are that they're coming here to save us and rescue us from on high.
The intelligent designer's always portrayed as this super intelligent, moral being that comes down to design life.
Even the idea that government can rescue us -- that's no longer the wave of the future, but that is, I think, a type of agenticity: projecting somebody up there, big and powerful, will come rescue us.
And this is also, I think, the basis of conspiracy theories.
There's somebody hiding behind there pulling the strings, whether it's the Illuminati or the Bilderbergers.
But this is a pattern detection problem, isn't it?
Some patterns are real and some are not.
Was JFK assassinated by a conspiracy or by a lone assassin?
Well, if you go there -- there's people there on any given day -- like when I went there, here -- showing me where the different shooters were.
My favorite one was he was in the manhole.
And he popped out at the last second, took that shot.
But of course, Lincoln was assassinated by a conspiracy.
So we can't just uniformly dismiss all patterns like that.
Because, let's face it, some patterns are real.
Some conspiracies really are true.
Explains a lot, maybe.
And 9/11 has a conspiracy theory. It is a conspiracy.
We did a whole issue on it.
Nineteen members of Al Queda plotting to fly planes into buildings constitutes a conspiracy.
But that's not what the "9/11 truthers" think.
They think it was an inside job by the Bush administration.
Well, that's a whole other lecture.
You know how we know that 9/11 was not orchestrated by the Bush administration?
Because it worked.
(Laughter) (Applause) So we are natural-born dualists.
Our agenticity process comes from the fact that we can enjoy movies like these.
Because we can imagine, in essence, continuing on.
We know that if you stimulate the temporal lobe, you can produce a feeling of out-of-body experiences, near-death experiences, which you can do by just touching an electrode to the temporal lobe there.
Or you can do it through loss of consciousness, by accelerating in a centrifuge.
You get a hypoxia, or a lower oxygen.
And the brain then senses that there's an out-of-body experience.
You can use -- which I did, went out and did -- Michael Persinger's God Helmet, that bombards your temporal lobes with electromagnetic waves.
And you get a sense of out-of-body experience.
So I'm going to end here with a short video clip that sort of brings all this together.
It's just a minute and a half.
It ties together all this into the power of expectation and the power of belief.
Go ahead and roll it.
Narrator: This is the venue they chose for their fake auditions for an advert for lip balm.
Woman: We're hoping we can use part of this in a national commercial, right?
And this is test on some lip balms that we have over here.
And these are our models who are going to help us, Roger and Matt.
And we have our own lip balm, and we have a leading brand.
Would you have any problem kissing our models to test it?
Girl: No.
Woman: You wouldn't? (Girl: No.) Woman: You'd think that was fine.
Girl: That would be fine. (Woman: Okay.) So this is a blind test.
I'm going to ask you to go ahead and put a blindfold on.
Kay, now can you see anything? (Girl: No.) Pull it so you can't even see down. (Girl: Okay.) Woman: It's completely blind now, right?
Girl: Yes. (Woman: Okay.) Now, what I'm going to be looking for in this test is how it protects your lips, the texture, right, and maybe if you can discern any flavor or not.
Girl: Okay. (Woman: Have you ever done a kissing test before?) Girl: No.
Woman: Take a step here.
Okay, now I'm going to ask you to pucker up.
Pucker up big and lean in just a little bit, okay?
(Music) (Laughter) (Laughter) Woman: Okay.
And, Jennifer, how did that feel?
Jennifer: Good.
(Laughter) Girl: Oh my God!
(Laughter) Michael Shermer: Thank you very much. Thank you. Thanks.
So, if you're in the audience today, or maybe you're watching this talk in some other time or place, you are a participant in the digital rights ecosystem.
Whether you're an artist, a technologist, a lawyer or a fan, the handling of copyright directly impacts your life.
Rights management is no longer simply a question of ownership, it's a complex web of relationships and a critical part of our cultural landscape.
YouTube cares deeply about the rights of content owners, but in order to give them choices about what they can do with copies, mashups and more, we need to first identify when copyrighted material is uploaded to our site.
Let's look at a specific video so you can see how it works.
Two years ago, recording artist Chris Brown released the official video of his single "Forever."
A fan saw it on TV, recorded it with her camera phone, and uploaded it to YouTube.
Because Sony Music had registered Chris Brown's video in our Content ID system, within seconds of attempting to upload the video, the copy was detected, giving Sony the choice of what to do next.
But how do we know that the user's video was a copy?
Well, it starts with content owners delivering assets into our database, along with a usage policy that tells us what to do when we find a match.
We compare each upload against all of the reference files in our database.
This heat map is going to show you how the brain of the system works.
Here we can see the original reference file being compared to the user generated content.
The system compares every moment of one to the other to see if there's a match.
This means that we can identify a match even if the copy used is just a portion of the original file, plays it in slow motion and has degraded audio and video quality.
And we do this every time that a video is uploaded to YouTube.
And that's over 20 hours of video every minute.
When we find a match, we apply the policy that the rights owner has set down.
And the scale and the speed of this system is truly breathtaking.
We're not just talking about a few videos, we're talking about over 100 years of video every day, between new uploads and the legacy scans we regularly do across all of the content on the site.
When we compare those hundred years of video, we're comparing it against millions of reference files in our database.
It would be like 36,000 people staring at 36,000 monitors each and every day, without so much as a coffee break.
Now, what do we do when we find a match?
Well, most rights owners, instead of blocking, will allow the copy to be published.
And then they benefit through the exposure, advertising and linked sales.
Remember Chris Brown's video "Forever"?
Well, it had its day in the sun and then it dropped off the charts, and that looked like the end of the story, but sometime last year, a young couple got married.
This is their wedding video.
You may have seen it.
(Music) What's amazing about this is, if the processional of the wedding was this much fun, can you imagine how much fun the reception must have been?
I mean, who are these people?
I totally want to go to that wedding.
So their little wedding video went on to get over 40 million views.
And instead of Sony blocking, they allowed the upload to occur.
And they put advertising against it and linked from it to iTunes.
And the song, 18 months old, went back to number four on the iTunes charts.
So Sony is generating revenue from both of these.
And Jill and Kevin, the happy couple, they came back from their honeymoon and found that their video had gone crazy viral.
And they've ended up on a bunch of talk shows, and they've used it as an opportunity to make a difference.
The video's inspired over 26,000 dollars in donations to end domestic violence.
The "JK Wedding [Entrance] Dance" became so popular that NBC parodied it on the season finale of "The Office," which just goes to show, it's truly an ecosystem of culture.
Because it's not just amateurs borrowing from big studios, but sometimes big studios borrowing back.
By empowering choice, we can create a culture of opportunity.
And all it took to change things around was to allow for choice through rights identification.
So why has no one ever solved this problem before?
It's because it's a big problem, and it's complicated and messy.
It's not uncommon for a single video to have multiple rights owners.
There's musical labels.
There's multiple music publishers.
And each of these can vary by country.
There's lots of cases where we have more than one work mashed together.
So we have to manage many claims to the same video.
YouTube's Content ID system addresses all of these cases.
But the system only works through the participation of rights owners.
If you have content that others are uploading to YouTube, you should register in the Content ID system, and then you'll have the choice about how your content is used.
And think carefully about the policies that you attach to that content.
By simply blocking all reuse, you'll miss out on new art forms, new audiences, new distribution channels and new revenue streams.
But it's not just about dollars and impressions.
Just look at all the joy that was spread through progressive rights management and new technology.
And I think we can all agree that joy is definitely an idea worth spreading.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Thank you so much. I'm going to try to take you on a journey of the underwater acoustic world of whales and dolphins.
Since we are such a visual species, it's hard for us to really understand this, so I'll use a mixture of figures and sounds and hope this can communicate it.
But let's also think, as a visual species, what it's like when we go snorkeling or diving and try to look underwater.
We really can't see very far.
Our vision, which works so well in air, all of a sudden is very restricted and claustrophobic.
And what marine mammals have evolved over the last tens of millions of years is ways to depend on sound to both explore their world and also to stay in touch with one another.
Dolphins and toothed whales use echolocation.
They can produce loud clicks and listen for echoes from the sea floor in order to orient.
They can listen for echoes from prey in order to decide where food is and to decide which one they want to eat.
All marine mammals use sound for communication to stay in touch.
So the large baleen whales will produce long, beautiful songs, which are used in reproductive advertisement for male and females, both to find one another and to select a mate.
And mother and young and closely bonded animals use calls to stay in touch with one another, so sound is really critical for their lives.
The first thing that got me interested in the sounds of these underwater animals, whose world was so foreign to me, was evidence from captive dolphins that captive dolphins could imitate human sounds.
And I mentioned I'll use some visual representations of sounds.
Here's the first example.
This is a plot of frequency against time -- sort of like musical notation, where the higher notes are up higher and the lower notes are lower, and time goes this way.
This is a picture of a trainer's whistle, a whistle a trainer will blow to tell a dolphin it's done the right thing and can come get a fish.
It sounds sort of like "tweeeeeet." Like that.
This is a calf in captivity making an imitation of that trainer's whistle.
If you hummed this tune to your dog or cat and it hummed it back to you, you ought to be pretty surprised.
Very few nonhuman mammals can imitate sounds.
It's really important for our music and our language.
So it's a puzzle: The few other mammal groups that do this, why do they do it?
A lot of my career has been devoted to trying to understand how these animals use their learning, use the ability to change what you say based on what you hear in their own communication systems.
So let's start with calls of a nonhuman primate.
Many mammals have to produce contact calls when, say, a mother and calf are apart.
This is an example of a call produced by squirrel monkeys when they're isolated from another one.
And you can see, there's not much variability in these calls.
By contrast, the signature whistle which dolphins use to stay in touch, each individual here has a radically different call.
They can use this ability to learn calls in order to develop more complicated and more distinctive calls to identify individuals.
How about the setting in which animals need to use this call?
Well let's look at mothers and calves.
In normal life for mother and calf dolphin, they'll often drift apart or swim apart if Mom is chasing a fish, and when they separate they have to get back together again.
What this figure shows is the percentage of the separations in which dolphins whistle, against the maximum distance.
So when dolphins are separating by less than 20 meters, less than half the time they need to use whistles.
Most of the time they can just find each other just by swimming around.
But all of the time when they separate by more than 100 meters, they need to use these individually distinctive whistles to come back together again.
Most of these distinctive signature whistles are quite stereotyped and stable through the life of a dolphin.
But there are some exceptions.
When a male dolphin leaves Mom, it will often join up with another male and form an alliance, which may last for decades.
As these two animals form a social bond, their distinctive whistles actually converge and become very similar.
This plot shows two members of a pair.
As you can see at the top here, they share an up-sweep, like "woop, woop, woop."
They both have that kind of up-sweep.
Whereas these members of a pair go "wo-ot, wo-ot, wo-ot."
And what's happened is they've used this learning process to develop a new sign that identifies this new social group.
It's a very interesting way that they can form a new identifier for the new social group that they've had.
Let's now take a step back and see what this message can tell us about protecting dolphins from human disturbance.
Anybody looking at this picture will know this dolphin is surrounded, and clearly his behavior is being disrupted.
This is a bad situation.
But it turns out that when just a single boat is approaching a group of dolphins at a couple hundred meters away, the dolphins will start whistling, they'll change what they're doing, they'll have a more cohesive group, wait for the boat to go by, and then they'll get back to normal business.
Well, in a place like Sarasota, Florida, the average interval between times that a boat is passing within a hundred meters of a dolphin group is six minutes.
So even in the situation that doesn't look as bad as this, it's still affecting the amount of time these animals have to do their normal work.
And if we look at a very pristine environment like western Australia, Lars Bider has done work comparing dolphin behavior and distribution before there were dolphin-watching boats.
When there was one boat, not much of an impact.
And two boats: When the second boat was added, what happened was that some of the dolphins left the area completely.
Of the ones that stayed, their reproductive rate declined.
So it could have a negative impact on the whole population.
When we think of marine-protected areas for animals like dolphins, this means that we have to be quite conscious about activities that we thought were benign.
We may need to regulate the intensity of recreational boating and actual whale watching in order to prevent these kinds of problems.
I'd also like to point out that sound doesn't obey boundaries.
So you can draw a line to try to protect an area, but chemical pollution and noise pollution will continue to move through the area.
And I'd like to switch now from this local, familiar, coastal environment to a much broader world of the baleen whales and the open ocean.
This is a kind of map we've all been looking at.
The world is mostly blue.
But I'd also like to point out that the oceans are much more connected than we think.
Notice how few barriers there are to movement across all of the oceans compared to land.
To me, the most mind-bending example of the interconnectedness of the ocean comes from an acoustic experiment where oceanographers took a ship to the southern Indian Ocean, deployed an underwater loudspeaker and played back a sound.
That same sound traveled to the west, and could be heard in Bermuda, and traveled to the east, and could be heard in Monterey -- the same sound.
So we live in a world of satellite communication, are used to global communication, but it's still amazing to me.
The ocean has properties that allow low-frequency sound to basically move globally.
The acoustic transit time for each of these paths is about three hours.
It's nearly halfway around the globe.
In the early '70s, Roger Payne and an ocean acoustician published a theoretical paper pointing out that it was possible that sound could transmit over these large areas, but very few biologists believed it.
It actually turns out, though, even though we've only known of long-range propagation for a few decades, the whales clearly have evolved, over tens of millions of years, a way to exploit this amazing property of the ocean.
So blue whales and fin whales produce very low-frequency sounds that can travel over very long ranges.
The top plot here shows a complicated series of calls that are repeated by males.
They form songs, and they appear to play a role in reproduction, sort of like that of song birds.
Down below here, we see calls made by both males and females that also carry over very long ranges.
The biologists continued to be skeptical of the long-range communication issue well past the '70s, until the end of the Cold War.
What happened was, during the Cold War, the U.S. Navy had a system that was secret at the time, that they used to track Russian submarines.
It had deep underwater microphones, or hydrophones, cabled to shore, all wired back to a central place that could listen to sounds over the whole North Atlantic.
And after the Berlin Wall fell, the Navy made these systems available to whale bio-acousticians to see what they could hear.
This is a plot from Christopher Clark who tracked one individual blue whale as it passed by Bermuda, went down to the latitude of Miami and came back again.
It was tracked for 43 days, swimming 1,700 kilometers, or more than 1,000 miles.
This shows us both that the calls are detectable over hundreds of miles and that whales routinely swim hundreds of miles.
They're ocean-based and scale animals who are communicating over much longer ranges than we had anticipated.
Unlike fins and blues, which disperse into the temperate and tropical oceans, the humpbacked whales congregate in local traditional breeding grounds, so they can make a sound that's a little higher in frequency, broader-band and more complicated.
So you're listening to the complicated song produced by humpbacks here.
Humpbacks, when they develop the ability to sing this song, they're listening to other whales and modifying what they sing based on what they're hearing, just like song birds or the dolphin whistles I described.
This means that humpback song is a form of animal culture, just like music for humans would be.
I think one of the most interesting examples of this comes from Australia.
Biologists on the east coast of Australia were recording the songs of humpbacks in that area.
And this orange line here marks the typical songs of east coast humpbacks.
In '95 they all sang the normal song.
But in '96 they heard a few weird songs, and it turned out that these strange songs were typical of west coast whales.
The west coast calls became more and more popular, until by 1998, none of the whales sang the east coast song; it was completely gone.
They just sang the cool new west coast song.
It's as if some new hit style had completely wiped out the old-fashioned style before, and with no golden oldies stations.
Nobody sang the old ones.
I'd like to briefly just show what the ocean does to these calls.
Now you are listening to a recording made by Chris Clark, 0.2 miles away from a humpback.
You can hear the full frequency range. It's quite loud.
You sound very nearby.
The next recording you're going to hear was made of the same humpback song 50 miles away.
That's shown down here.
You only hear the low frequencies.
You hear the reverberation as the sound travels over long-range in the ocean and is not quite as loud.
Now after I play back these humpback calls, I'll play blue whale calls, but they have to be sped up because they're so low in frequency that you wouldn't be able to hear it otherwise.
Here's a blue whale call at 50 miles, which was distant for the humpback.
It's loud, clear -- you can hear it very clearly.
Here's the same call recorded from a hydrophone 500 miles away.
There's a lot of noise, which is mostly other whales.
But you can still hear that faint call.
Let's now switch and think about a potential for human impacts.
The most dominant sound that humans put into the ocean comes from shipping.
This is the sound of a ship, and I'm having to talk a little louder to talk over it.
Imagine that whale listening from 500 miles.
There's a potential problem that maybe this kind of shipping noise would prevent whales from being able to hear each other.
Now this is something that's been known for quite a while.
This is a figure from a textbook on underwater sound.
And on the y-axis is the loudness of average ambient noise in the deep ocean by frequency.
In the low frequencies, this line indicates sound that comes from seismic activity of the earth.
Up high, these variable lines indicate increasing noise in this frequency range from higher wind and wave.
But right in the middle here where there's a sweet spot, the noise is dominated by human ships.
Now think about it. This is an amazing thing: That in this frequency range where whales communicate, the main source globally, on our planet, for the noise comes from human ships, thousands of human ships, distant, far away, just all aggregating.
The next slide will show what the impact this may have on the range at which whales can communicate.
So here we have the loudness of a call at the whale.
And as we get farther away, the sound gets fainter and fainter.
Now in the pre-industrial ocean, as we were mentioning, this whale call could be easily detected.
It's louder than noise at a range of a thousand kilometers.
Let's now take that additional increase in noise that we saw comes from shipping.
All of a sudden, the effective range of communication goes from a thousand kilometers to 10 kilometers.
Now if this signal is used for males and females to find each other for mating and they're dispersed, imagine the impact this could have on the recovery of endangered populations.
Whales also have contact calls like I described for the dolphins.
I'll play the sound of a contact call used by right whales to stay in touch.
And this is the kind of call that is used by, say, right whale mothers and calves as they separate to come back again.
Now imagine -- let's put the ship noise in the picture.
What's a mother to do if the ship comes by and her calf isn't there?
I'll describe a couple strategies.
One strategy is if your call's down here, and the noise is in this band, you could shift the frequency of your call out of the noise band and communicate better.
Susan Parks of Penn State has actually studied this.
She's looked in the Atlantic. Here's data from the South Atlantic.
Here's a typical South Atlantic contact call from the '70s.
Look what happened by 2000 to the average call.
Same thing in the North Atlantic, in the '50s versus 2000.
Over the last 50 years, as we've put more noise into the oceans, these whales have had to shift.
It's as if the whole population had to shift from being basses to singing as a tenor.
It's an amazing shift, induced by humans over this large scale, in both time and space.
And we now know that whales can compensate for noise by calling louder, like I did when that ship was playing, by waiting for silence and by shifting their call out of the noise band.
Now there's probably costs to calling louder or shifting the frequency away from where you want to be, and there's probably lost opportunities.
If we also have to wait for silence, they may miss a critical opportunity to communicate.
So we have to be very concerned about when the noise in habitats degrades the habitat enough that the animals either have to pay too much to be able to communicate, or are not able to perform critical functions.
It's a really important problem.
And I'm happy to say that there are several very promising developments in this area, looking at the impact of shipping on whales.
In terms of the shipping noise, the International Maritime Organization of the United Nations has formed a group whose job is to establish guidelines for quieting ships, to tell the industry how you could quiet ships.
And they've already found that by being more intelligent about better propeller design, you can reduce that noise by 90 percent.
If you actually insulate and isolate the machinery of the ship from the hull, you can reduce that noise by 99 percent.
So at this point, it's primarily an issue of cost and standards.
If this group can establish standards, and if the shipbuilding industry adopts them for building new ships, we can now see a gradual decline in this potential problem.
But there's also another problem from ships that I'm illustrating here, and that's the problem of collision.
This is a whale that just squeaked by a rapidly moving container ship and avoided collision.
But collision is a serious problem.
Endangered whales are killed every year by ship collision, and it's very important to try to reduce this.
I'll discuss two very promising approaches.
The first case comes from the Bay of Fundy.
These black lines mark shipping lanes in and out of the Bay of Fundy.
The colorized area shows the risk of collision for endangered right whales because of the ships moving in this lane.
It turns out that this lane here goes right through a major feeding area of right whales in the summer time, and it makes an area of a significant risk of collision.
Well, biologists who couldn't take no for an answer went to the International Maritime Organization and petitioned them to say, "Can't you move that lane? Those are just lines on the ground.
Can't you move them over to a place where there's less of a risk?"
And the International Maritime Organization responded very strongly, "These are the new lanes."
The shipping lanes have been moved.
And as you can see, the risk of collision is much lower.
So it's very promising, actually.
We can be very creative about thinking of different ways to reduce these risks.
Another action which was just taken independently by a shipping company itself was initiated because of concerns the shipping company had about greenhouse gas emissions with global warming.
The Maersk Line looked at their competition and saw that everybody who is in shipping thinks time is money.
They rush as fast as they can to get to their port.
But then they often wait there.
What Maersk did is they worked ways to slow down.
They could slow down by about 50 percent.
This reduced their fuel consumption by about 30 percent, which saved them money, and at the same time, it had a significant benefit for whales.
It you slow down, you reduce the amount of noise you make and you reduce the risk of collision.
So to conclude, I'd just like to point out, you know, the whales live in an amazing acoustic environment.
They've evolved over tens of millions of years to take advantage of this.
And we need to be very attentive and vigilant to thinking about where things that we do may unintentionally prevent them from being able to achieve their important activities.
At the same time, we need to be really creative in thinking of solutions to be able to help reduce these problems.
I hope these examples have shown some of the different directions we can take in addition to protected areas to be able to keep the ocean safe for whales to be able to continue to communicate.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I would be willing to bet I'm the dumbest guy in the room, because I couldn't get through school; I struggled with school.
But I knew at a very early age that I loved money, I loved business and I loved this entrepreneurial thing.
I was raised to be an entrepreneur.
What I've been really passionate about ever since -- and I've never spoken about this ever, until now -- so this is the first time anyone's heard it, except my wife, three days ago.
I told her that I think we miss an opportunity to find these kids who have the entrepreneurial traits, and to groom them or show them that being an entrepreneur is actually a cool thing.
It's not something that is a bad thing and is vilified, which is what happens in a lot of society.
Kids, when we grow up, have dreams, and we have passions, and we have visions, and somehow we get those things crushed.
We get told that we need to study harder or be more focused or get a tutor.
My parents got me a tutor in French, and I still suck in French.
Two years ago, I was the highest-rated lecturer at MIT's Entrepreneurial Master's Program.
It was a speaking event in front of groups of entrepreneurs from around the world.
When I was in grade two, I won a citywide speaking competition, but nobody had ever said, "Hey, this kid's a good speaker.
He can't focus, but he loves walking around and getting people energized."
No one said, "Get him a coach in speaking."
They said, get me a tutor in what I suck at.
So as kids show these traits -- and we need to start looking for them -- I think we should be raising kids to be entrepreneurs instead of lawyers.
Unfortunately, the school system is grooming this world to say, "Let's be a lawyer," or, "Let's be a doctor."
We're missing that opportunity, because no one ever says, "Hey, be an entrepreneur."
Entrepreneurs are people -- we have a lot of them in this room -- who have ideas and passions or see these needs in the world and decide to stand up and do it.
And we put everything on the line to make that stuff happen.
We have the ability to get the groups of people around us that want to build that dream with us.
And I think if we could get kids to embrace the idea at a young age, of being entrepreneurial, we could change everything in the world that's a problem today.
Every problem out there, somebody has the idea for.
And as a young kid, nobody can say it can't happen, because you're too dumb to realize that you couldn't figure it out.
I think we have an obligation as parents and a society to start teaching our kids to fish instead of giving them the fish -- the old parable: "Give a man a fish, you feed him for a day.
If we can teach our kids to be entrepreneurial, the ones that show the traits to be, like we teach the ones who have science gifts to go on in science, what if we saw the ones with entrepreneurial traits and taught them to be entrepreneurs?
We could have these kids spreading businesses instead of waiting for government handouts.
What we do is teach our kids the things they shouldn't do: don't hit; don't bite; don't swear.
Right now we teach our kids to go after really good jobs; the school system teaches them to go after things like being a doctor and being a lawyer and being an accountant and a dentist and a teacher and a pilot.
And the media says it's really cool if we could go out and be a model or a singer or a sports hero like Luongo or Crosby.
Our MBA programs do not teach kids to be entrepreneurs.
The reason I avoided an MBA program, other than that I didn't get into any, since I had a 61 percent average out of high school, then a 61 percent average at the only school in Canada that accepted me, Carlton, is that our MBA programs don't teach kids to be entrepreneurs.
They teach them to work in corporations.
So who's starting these companies? It's these random few people.
Even in popular literature, the only book I've ever found -- and this should be on all your reading lists -- the only book I've ever found that makes the entrepreneur a hero is "Atlas Shrugged."
Everything else in the world looks at entrepreneurs and says we're bad people.
Both my grandfathers and my dad were entrepreneurs.
My brother, sister and I, all three of us own companies as well.
We all decided to start these things because it's the only place we fit.
We didn't fit in normal work; we couldn't work for somebody else, we're stubborn and we have all these other traits.
But kids could be entrepreneurs as well.
I'm a big part of a couple organizations called the Entrepreneurs' Organization and the Young Presidents' Organization.
I just came back from speaking in Barcelona at the YPO global conference.
And everyone I met over there who's an entrepreneur struggled with school.
I have 18 out of the 19 signs of attention deficit disorder diagnosed.
So this thing right here is freaking me out.
(Laughter) It's probably why I'm a bit panicked, other than all the caffeine I've had and the sugar.
But this is really creepy for an entrepreneur.
Attention deficit disorder, bipolar disorder.
Do you know that bipolar disorder is nicknamed the CEO disease?
Ted Turner's got it. Steve Jobs has it.
All three of the founders of Netscape had it.
I could go on and on.
Kids -- you can see these signs in kids.
And we're giving them Ritalin and saying, "Don't be an entrepreneurial type.
Fit into this other system and try to become a student."
Sorry, entrepreneurs aren't students.
I stole essays. I cheated on exams.
I hired kids to do my accounting assignments in university for 13 consecutive assignments.
But as an entrepreneur, you don't do accounting, you hire accountants.
So I just figured that out earlier.
(Laughter) (Applause) At least I can admit I cheated in university; most of you won't.
I'm also quoted -- and I told the person who wrote the textbook -- I'm now quoted in that exact same university textbook in every Canadian university and college studies -- in managerial accounting, I'm chapter eight.
I open up chapter eight, talking about budgeting.
I told the author, after they did my interview, that I cheated in that same course.
But kids, you can see these signs in them.
The definition of entrepreneur is "a person who organizes, operates and assumes the risk of a business venture."
That doesn't mean you have to go to an MBA program, or that you have to get through school.
We've heard, "Is it nurture or is it nature?" Right?
Is it thing one or thing two? What is it?
Well, I don't think it's either. I think it can be both.
I was groomed as an entrepreneur.
When I was growing up as a young kid, I had no choice, because I was taught at a very early age, when my dad realized I didn't fit into everything else that was being taught to me in school, that he could teach me to figure out business at an early age.
He groomed us, the three of us, to hate the thought of having a job and to love the fact of creating companies where we could employ other people.
I was in my bedroom with one of those long extension cords, calling all the dry cleaners in Winnipeg to find out how much they'd pay me for coat hangers.
And my mom came into the room and said, "Where are you going to get the hangers to sell to the dry cleaners?"
And I said, "Let's go look in the basement."
We went down to the basement, and I opened up this cupboard.
There was about 1,000 hangers that I'd collected, because, when I told her I was going out to play, I was going door to door in the neighborhood to collect hangers to put in the basement, because I saw her a few weeks before that -- you could get paid, they used to pay two cents per coat hanger.
So I was like, well, there's all kinds of hangers, so I'll just go get them.
And I learned that you could actually negotiate with people.
This one guy offered me three cents and I got him up to three and a half.
I even knew at seven years old that I could get a fractional percent of a cent, and people would pay it, because it multiplied up.
At seven years old I figured it out.
I got three and a half cents for 1,000 hangers.
I sold license plate protectors door to door.
My dad actually made me go find someone who would sell me them at wholesale.
At nine years old, I walked around in the city of Sudbury selling license-plate protectors door to door.
And I remember this one customer so vividly -- I also did some other stuff with these clients, I sold newspapers, and he wouldn't buy a newspaper from me, ever.
But I was convinced I was going to get him to buy a license-plate protector.
And he's like, "We don't need one."
Remember, I'm nine years old.
I'm like, "You have two cars and they don't have license-plate protectors.
And this car has one license plate that's all crumpled up."
He said, "That's my wife's car."
I said, "Why don't we test one on her car and see if it lasts longer?"
So I knew there were two cars with two license plates on each.
If I couldn't sell all four, I could at least get one.
I learned that at a young age.
When I was about 10 years old, I sold comic books out of our cottage on Georgian Bay.
I would go biking up to the end of the beach, buy all the comics from the poor kids, then go back to the other end of the beach to sell them to the rich kids.
It was obvious to me: buy low, sell high.
You've got this demand over here that has money.
The rich people do. Obvious, right?
It's like a recession.
So there's a recession.
Go get some of that. I learned that at a young age.
I also learned, don't reveal your source: I got beat up after four weeks of this, because one of the rich kids found out where I was buying my comics, and didn't like that he was paying more.
I was forced to get a paper route at 10 years old.
I didn't want a paper route, but my dad said, "That's your next business."
Not only did he get me one, but I had to get two.
He wanted me to hire someone to deliver half the papers, which I did.
Then I realized: collecting tips is how you made all the money.
So I'd collect tips and get payment.
I would collect for the papers -- he could just deliver them.
Because then I realized I could make money.
By this point, I was definitely not going to be an employee.
(Laughter) My dad owned an automotive and industrial repair shop.
He had all these old automotive parts lying around.
They had this old brass and copper.
I asked what he did with it, and he said he just throws it out.
I said, "Wouldn't somebody pay for that?" And he goes, "Maybe."
Remember: at 10 years old, 34 years ago, I saw opportunity in this stuff, I saw there was money in garbage.
And I collected it from the automotive shops in the area on my bicycle.
Then my dad would drive me on Saturdays to a scrap metal recycler where I got paid.
And I thought that was kind of cool.
Strangely enough, 30 years later, we're building 1-800-GOT-JUNK?
and making money off that, too.
We made these pincushions for our moms for Mother's Day out of wooden clothespins -- when we used to hang clothes on clotheslines outside.
And you'd make these chairs.
And I had these little pillows that I would sew up.
And you could stuff pins in them.
Because people used to sew and they needed a pincushion.
But I realized you had to have options, so I spray-painted a whole bunch of them brown, so when I went to the door, it wasn't, "Do you want to buy one?"
It was, "Which color would you like?"
I'm 10 years old; you're not going to say no, especially if you have two options, the brown one or the clear one.
So I learned that lesson at a young age.
Right, like cutting lawns is brutal.
But because I had to cut lawns all summer for all of our neighbors and get paid to do that, I realized that recurring revenue from one client is amazing, that if I land this client once, and every week I get paid by that person, that's way better than trying to sell one clothespin thing to one person, because you can't sell them more.
So I love that recurring revenue model I started to learn at a young age.
Remember, I was being groomed to do this. I was not allowed to have jobs.
I would go to the golf course and caddy for people, but I realized there was this one hill on our golf course, the 13th hole, that had this huge hill, and people could never get their bags up it.
So I'd sit there in a lawn chair and carry for all the people who didn't have caddies.
I'd carry their golf bags to the top; they'd pay me a dollar, while my friends worked for hours hauling some guy's bag around for 10 bucks.
That doesn't make sense. Figure out a way to make more money faster.
Every week, I'd go to the corner store and buy all these pops, Then I'd deliver them to these 70-year-old women playing bridge.
They'd give me their orders for the following week.
I'd deliver pop and charge twice.
You didn't need contracts, you just needed to have a supply and demand and this audience who bought into you.
These women weren't going to go to anybody else because they liked me, and I kind of figured it out.
But everybody else was looking in the bush and looking in the ditches for golf balls.
I'm like, screw that. They're in the pond. And nobody's going into the pond.
So I'd go into the ponds and crawl around and pick them up with my toes, just pick them up with both feet.
You can't do it onstage.
You get the golf balls, throw them in your bathing suit trunks and when you're done, you've got a couple hundred of them.
But the problem is, people didn't want all the golf balls.
So I just packaged them. I'm like 12, right?
I had the Pinnacles, DDHs and the really cool ones.
Those sold for two dollars each.
Then I had the good ones that didn't look crappy: 50 cents each.
And then I'd sell 50 at a time of all the crappy ones.
And they could use those for practice balls.
I sold sunglasses when I was in school, to all the kids in high school.
This is what really kind of gets everybody hating you, because you're trying to extract money from all your friends all the time.
But it paid the bills.
So I sold lots and lots of sunglasses.
Then when the school shut me down -- they called me into the office and told me I couldn't do it -- I went to the gas stations and sold lots of them to the gas stations and had the gas stations sell them to their customers.
That was cool because then, I had retail outlets.
I think I was 14.
Then I paid my entire way through first year of university at Carlton by selling wineskins door to door.
You know you can hold a 40-ounce bottle of rum and two bottles of coke in a wineskin?
So what, right? But you know what?
Stuff that down your shorts when you go to a football game, you can get booze in for free.
Everybody bought them.
I also branded it, so I sold them for five times the normal cost.
It had our university logo on it.
You know, we teach our kids and we buy them games, but why don't we get them games, if they're entrepreneurial kids, that nurture the traits you need to be entrepreneurs?
Why don't you teach them not to waste money?
I remember being told to walk out into the middle of a street in Banff, Alberta.
I'd thrown a penny out in the street, and my dad said, "Go pick it up.
I work too damn hard for my money. I'm not going to see you waste a penny."
I remember that lesson to this day.
Allowances teach kids the wrong habits.
Allowances, by nature, are teaching kids to think about a job.
An entrepreneur doesn't expect a regular paycheck.
Allowance is breeding kids at a young age to expect a regular paycheck.
That's wrong, for me, if you want to raise entrepreneurs.
What I do with my kids, nine and seven, is teach them to walk around the house and the yard, looking for stuff that needs to get done.
Come and tell me what it is.
And then, you know what we do? We negotiate.
They go around looking for what it is, then we negotiate what they'll get paid.
They don't have a regular check, but they have opportunities to find more stuff, and learn the skill of negotiating and of finding opportunities.
You breed that kind of stuff.
Each of my kids has two piggy banks.
Fifty percent of all the money they earn goes in their house account, 50 percent goes in their toy account.
The toy account, they spend on whatever they want.
The 50 percent in their house account, every six months, goes to the bank.
they walk up with me.
Every year, all the money in the bank goes to their broker.
I'm teaching them to force that savings habit.
It drives me crazy that 30-year-olds are saying, "Maybe I'll start contributing to my RSP now."
Shit, you've missed 25 years.
You can teach those habits to young kids, when they don't even feel the pain yet.
Don't read bedtime stories every night -- maybe four nights of the week, and three nights, have them tell stories.
Why don't you sit down with kids and give them four items, a red shirt, a blue tie, a kangaroo and a laptop, and have them tell a story about those four things?
It teaches them to sell, teaches them creativity, teaches them to think on their feet.
Do that kind of stuff, have fun with it.
Get kids to stand up in front of groups and talk, even if it's just in front of their friends, and do plays and have speeches.
Those are entrepreneurial traits you want to be nurturing.
Show them grumpy employees.
When you see grumpy customer service, point it out.
Say, "By the way, that guy is a crappy employee."
(Laughter) If you go into a restaurant and have bad customer service, show them what bad customer service looks like.
(Laughter) We have all these lessons in front of us, but we don't take those opportunities; we teach kids to get a tutor.
Imagine if you actually took all the kids' junk in the house right now, all the toys they outgrew two years ago and said, "Why don't we sell some of this on Craigslist and Kijiji?"
And they actually sell it and learn how to find scammers when offers come in.
They can come into your account or a sub account or whatever.
But teach them how to fix the price, guess the price, pull up the photos.
Teach them how to do that kind of stuff and make money.
Then 50 percent goes in their house account, 50 percent in their toy account.
Some of the entrepreneurial traits you've got to nurture in kids: attainment, tenacity, leadership, introspection, interdependence, values.
All these traits, you can find in young kids, and you can help nurture them.
Look for that kind of stuff.
There's two traits I want you to also look out for that we don't get out of their system.
Don't medicate kids for attention deficit disorder unless it is really, really freaking bad.
(Applause) The same with the whole things on mania and stress and depression, unless it is so clinically brutal, man.
Bipolar disorder is nicknamed "the CEO disease."
When Steve Jurvetson, Jim Clark and Jim Barksdale have all got it, and they built Netscape -- imagine if they were given Ritalin.
Al Gore really would have had to invented the Internet.
(Laughter) These are the skills we should be teaching in the classroom, as well as everything else.
I'm not saying don't get kids to want to be lawyers.
But how about getting entrepreneurship to be ranked right up there with the rest of them?
Because there's huge opportunities in that.
I want to close with a quick video that was done by one of the companies I mentor.
These guys, Grasshopper.
It's about kids.
Hopefully, this inspires you to take what you've heard from me and do something with it to change the world.
[Kid... "And you thought you could do anything?"] [You still can.] [Because a lot of what we consider impossible] [is easy to overcome] [Because in case you haven't noticed, we live in a place where] [one individual can make a difference] [Want proof?] [Just look at the people who built our country:] [Our parents, grandparents, our aunts, uncles] [They were immigrants, newcomers ready to make their mark] [Maybe they came with very little] [or perhaps they didn't own anything except for] [a single brilliant idea] [These people were thinkers, doers] [innovators] [until they came up with the name] [entrepreneurs] [They change the way we think about what is possible.] [They have a clear vision of how life can be better] [for all of us, even when times are tough.] [Right now, it's hard to see] [when our view is cluttered with obstacles.] [But turbulence creates opportunities] [for success, achievement, and pushes us] [to discover new ways of doing things] [So what opportunities will you go after and why?] [If you're an entrepreneur] [you know that risk isn't the reward.] [No. The rewards are driving innovation] [changing people's lives. Creating jobs.] [Fueling growth.] [And making a better world.] [Entrepreneurs are everywhere.] [They run small businesses that support our economy,] [design tools to help you] [stay connected with friends, family and colleagues] [And they're finding new ways of helping to solve society's oldest problems.] [Do you know an entrepreneur?] [Entrepreneurs can be anyone Even... you] [So seize the opportunity to create the job you always wanted] [Help heal the economy] [Make a difference.] [Take your business to new heights,] [but most importantly,] [remember when you were a kid] [when everything was within your reach,] [and then say to yourself quietly, but with determination:] [it still is.] Thank you very much for having me.
(Music) [Sanskrit] This is an ode to the mother goddess, that most of us in India learn when we are children.
I learned it when I was four at my mother's knee.
That year she introduced me to dance, and thus began my tryst with classical dance.
Since then -- it's been four decades now -- I've trained with the best in the field, performed across the globe, taught young and old alike, created, collaborated, choreographed, and wove a rich tapestry of artistry, achievement and awards.
The crowning glory was in 2007, when I received this country's fourth highest civilian award, the Padma Shri, for my contribution to art.
(Applause) But nothing, nothing prepared me for what I was to hear on the first of July 2008.
I heard the word "carcinoma."
Yes, breast cancer.
As I sat dumbstruck in my doctor's office, I heard other words: "cancer," "stage," "grade."
Until then, Cancer was the zodiac sign of my friend, stage was what I performed on, and grades were what I got in school.
That day, I realized I had an unwelcome, uninvited, new life partner.
As a dancer, I know the nine rasas or the navarasas: anger, valor, disgust, humor and fear.
I thought I knew what fear was.
That day, I learned what fear was.
Overcome with the enormity of it all and the complete feeling of loss of control, I shed copious tears and asked my dear husband, Jayant.
I said, "Is this it? Is this the end of the road?
Is this the end of my dance?"
And he, the positive soul that he is, said, "No, this is just a hiatus, a hiatus during the treatment, and you'll get back to doing what you do best."
I realized then that I, who thought I had complete control of my life, had control of only three things: My thought, my mind -- the images that these thoughts created -- and the action that derived from it.
So here I was wallowing in a vortex of emotions and depression and what have you, with the enormity of the situation, wanting to go to a place of healing, health and happiness.
I wanted to go from where I was to where I wanted to be, for which I needed something.
I needed something that would pull me out of all this.
So I dried my tears, and I declared to the world at large ...
I said, "Cancer's only one page in my life, and I will not allow this page to impact the rest of my life."
I also declared to the world at large that I would ride it out, and I would not allow cancer to ride me.
But to go from where I was to where I wanted to be, I needed something.
I needed an anchor, an image, a peg to peg this process on, so that I could go from there.
And I found that in my dance, my dance, my strength, my energy, my passion, my very life breath.
But it wasn't easy.
Believe me, it definitely wasn't easy.
How do you keep cheer when you go from beautiful to bald in three days?
How do you not despair when, with the body ravaged by chemotherapy, climbing a mere flight of stairs was sheer torture, that to someone like me who could dance for three hours?
How do you not get overwhelmed by the despair and the misery of it all?
All I wanted to do was curl up and weep.
But I kept telling myself fear and tears are options I did not have.
So I would drag myself into my dance studio -- body, mind and spirit -- every day into my dance studio, and learn everything I learned when I was four, all over again, reworked, relearned, regrouped.
It was excruciatingly painful, but I did it.
Difficult.
I focused on my mudras, on the imagery of my dance, on the poetry and the metaphor and the philosophy of the dance itself.
And slowly, I moved out of that miserable state of mind.
But I needed something else.
I needed something to go that extra mile, and I found it in that metaphor which I had learned from my mother when I was four.
The metaphor of Mahishasura Mardhini, of Durga.
Durga, the mother goddess, the fearless one, created by the pantheon of Hindu gods.
Durga, resplendent, bedecked, beautiful, her 18 arms ready for warfare, as she rode astride her lion into the battlefield to destroy Mahishasur.
Durga, the epitome of creative feminine energy, or shakti.
Durga, the fearless one.
I made that image of Durga and her every attribute, her every nuance, my very own.
Powered by the symbology of a myth and the passion of my training, I brought laser-sharp focus into my dance, laser-sharp focus to such an extent that I danced a few weeks after surgery.
I danced through chemo and radiation cycles, much to the dismay of my oncologist.
I danced between chemo and radiation cycles and badgered him to fit it to my performing dance schedule.
What I had done is I had tuned out of cancer and tuned into my dance.
Yes, cancer has just been one page in my life.
My story is a story of overcoming setbacks, obstacles and challenges that life throws at you.
My story is the power of thought.
My story is the power of choice.
It's the power of focus.
It's the power of bringing ourselves to the attention of something that so animates you, so moves you, that something even like cancer becomes insignificant.
My story is the power of a metaphor.
It's the power of an image.
Mine was that of Durga, Durga the fearless one.
She was also called Simhanandini, the one who rode the lion.
As I ride out, as I ride my own inner strength, my own inner resilience, armed as I am with what medication can provide and continue treatment, as I ride out into the battlefield of cancer, asking my rogue cells to behave, I want to be known not as a cancer survivor, but as a cancer conqueror.
I present to you an excerpt of that work "Simhanandini."
(Applause) (Music) (Applause)
I'm going to talk about the simple truth in leadership in the 21st century.
In the 21st century, we need to actually look at -- and what I'm actually going to encourage you to consider today -- is to go back to our school days when we learned how to count.
But I think it's time for us to think about what we count.
Because what we actually count truly counts.
Let me start by telling you a little story.
This is Van Quach.
She came to this country in 1986 from Vietnam.
She changed her name to Vivian because she wanted to fit in here in America.
Her first job was at an inner-city motel in San Francisco as a maid.
I happened to buy that motel about three months after Vivian started working there.
So Vivian and I have been working together for 23 years.
With the youthful idealism of a 26-year-old, in 1987, I started my company and I called it Joie de Vivre, a very impractical name, because I actually was looking to create joy of life.
And this first hotel that I bought, motel, was a pay-by-the-hour, no-tell motel in the inner-city of San Francisco.
As I spent time with Vivian, I saw that she had sort of a joie de vivre in how she did her work.
It made me question and curious: How could someone actually find joy in cleaning toilets for a living?
So I spent time with Vivian, and I saw that she didn't find joy in cleaning toilets.
Her job, her goal and her calling was not to become the world's greatest toilet scrubber.
What counts for Vivian was the emotional connection she created with her fellow employees and our guests.
And what gave her inspiration and meaning was the fact that she was taking care of people who were far away from home.
Because Vivian knew what it was like to be far away from home.
That very human lesson, more than 20 years ago, served me well during the last economic downturn we had.
In the wake of the dotcom crash and 9/11, San Francisco Bay Area hotels went through the largest percentage revenue drop in the history of American hotels.
We were the largest operator of hotels in the Bay Area, so we were particularly vulnerable.
But also back then, remember we stopped eating French fries in this country.
Well, not exactly, of course not.
We started eating "freedom fries," and we started boycotting anything that was French.
Well, my name of my company, Joie de Vivre -- so I started getting these letters from places like Alabama and Orange County saying to me that they were going to boycott my company because they thought we were a French company.
And I'd write them back, and I'd say, "What a minute. We're not French.
We're an American company. We're based in San Francisco."
And I'd get a terse response: "Oh, that's worse."
(Laughter) So one particular day when I was feeling a little depressed and not a lot of joie de vivre, I ended up in the local bookstore around the corner from our offices.
And I initially ended up in the business section of the bookstore looking for a business solution.
But given my befuddled state of mind, I ended up in the self-help section very quickly.
That's where I got reacquainted with Abraham Maslow's "hierarchy of needs."
I took one psychology class in college, and I learned about this guy, Abraham Maslow, as many of us are familiar with his hierarchy of needs.
But as I sat there for four hours, the full afternoon, reading Maslow, I recognized something that is true of most leaders.
One of the simplest facts in business is something that we often neglect, and that is that we're all human.
Each of us, no matter what our role is in business, has some hierarchy of needs in the workplace.
So as I started reading more Maslow, what I started to realize is that Maslow, later in his life, wanted to take this hierarchy for the individual and apply it to the collective, to organizations and specifically to business.
But unfortunately, he died prematurely in 1970, and so he wasn't really able to live that dream completely.
So I realized in that dotcom crash that my role in life was to channel Abe Maslow.
And that's what I did a few years ago when I took that five-level hierarchy of needs pyramid and turned it into what I call the transformation pyramid, which is survival, success and transformation.
It's not just fundamental in business, it's fundamental in life.
And we started asking ourselves the questions about how we were actually addressing the higher needs, these transformational needs for our key employees in the company.
These three levels of the hierarchy needs relate to the five levels of Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
But as we started asking ourselves about how we were addressing the higher needs of our employees and our customers, I realized we had no metrics.
We had nothing that actually could tell us whether we were actually getting it right.
So we started asking ourselves: What kind of less obvious metrics could we use to actually evaluate our employees' sense of meaning, or our customers' sense of emotional connection with us?
For example, we actually started asking our employees, do they understand the mission of our company, and do they feel like they believe in it, can they actually influence it, and do they feel that their work actually has an impact on it?
We started asking our customers, did they feel an emotional connection with us, in one of seven different kinds of ways.
Miraculously, as we asked these questions and started giving attention higher up the pyramid, what we found is we created more loyalty.
Our customer loyalty skyrocketed.
Our employee turnover dropped to one-third of the industry average, and during that five year dotcom bust, we tripled in size.
As I went out and started spending time with other leaders out there and asking them how they were getting through that time, what they told me over and over again was that they just manage what they can measure.
What we can measure is that tangible stuff at the bottom of the pyramid.
They didn't even see the intangible stuff higher up the pyramid.
So I started asking myself the question: How can we get leaders to start valuing the intangible?
If we're taught as leaders to just manage what we can measure, and all we can measure is the tangible in life, we're missing a whole lot of things at the top of the pyramid.
So I went out and studied a bunch of things, and I found a survey that showed that 94 percent of business leaders worldwide believe that the intangibles are important in their business, things like intellectual property, their corporate culture, their brand loyalty, and yet, only five percent of those same leaders actually had a means of measuring the intangibles in their business.
So as leaders, we understand that intangibles are important, but we don't have a clue how to measure them.
So here's another Einstein quote: "Not everything that can be counted counts, and not everything that counts can be counted."
I hate to argue with Einstein, but if that which is most valuable in our life and our business actually can't be counted or valued, aren't we going to spend our lives just mired in measuring the mundane?
It was that sort of heady question about what counts that led me to take my CEO hat off for a week and fly off to the Himalayan peaks.
I flew off to a place that's been shrouded in mystery for centuries, a place some folks call Shangri-La.
It's actually moved from the survival base of the pyramid to becoming a transformational role model for the world.
I went to Bhutan.
The teenage king of Bhutan was also a curious man, but this was back in 1972, when he ascended to the throne two days after his father passed away.
At age 17, he started asking the kinds of questions that you'd expect of someone with a beginner's mind.
On a trip through India, early in his reign as king, he was asked by an Indian journalist about the Bhutanese GDP, the size of the Bhutanese GDP.
The king responded in a fashion that actually has transformed us four decades later.
He said the following, he said: "Why are we so obsessed and focused with gross domestic product?
Why don't we care more about gross national happiness?"
Now, in essence, the king was asking us to consider an alternative definition of success, what has come to be known as GNH, or gross national happiness.
Most world leaders didn't take notice, and those that did thought this was just "Buddhist economics."
But the king was serious.
This was a notable moment, because this was the first time a world leader in almost 200 years had suggested that intangible of happiness -- that leader 200 years ago, Thomas Jefferson with the Declaration of Independence -- 200 years later, this king was suggesting that intangible of happiness is something that we should measure, and it's something we should actually value as government officials.
For the next three dozen years as king, this king actually started measuring and managing around happiness in Bhutan -- including, just recently, taking his country from being an absolute monarchy to a constitutional monarchy with no bloodshed, no coup.
Bhutan, for those of you who don't know it, is the newest democracy in the world, just two years ago.
So as I spent time with leaders in the GNH movement, I got to really understand what they're doing.
And I got to spend some time with the prime minister.
Over dinner, I asked him an impertinent question.
I asked him, "How can you create and measure something which evaporates -- in other words, happiness?"
And he's a very wise man, and he said, "Listen, Bhutan's goal is not to create happiness.
We create the conditions for happiness to occur.
In other words, we create a habitat of happiness."
Wow, that's interesting.
He said that they have a science behind that art, and they've actually created four essential pillars, nine key indicators and 72 different metrics that help them to measure their GNH.
One of those key indicators is: How do the Bhutanese feel about how they spend their time each day?
It's a good question. How do you feel about how you spend your time each day?
Time is one of the scarcest resources in the modern world.
And yet, of course, that little intangible piece of data doesn't factor into our GDP calculations.
As I spent my week up in the Himalayas, I started to imagine what I call an emotional equation.
And it focuses on something I read long ago from a guy named Rabbi Hyman Schachtel.
How many know him? Anybody?
1954, he wrote a book called "The Real Enjoyment of Living," and he suggested that happiness is not about having what you want; instead, it's about wanting what you have.
Or in other words, I think the Bhutanese believe happiness equals wanting what you have -- imagine gratitude -- divided by having what you want -- gratification.
The Bhutanese aren't on some aspirational treadmill, constantly focused on what they don't have.
Their religion, their isolation, their deep respect for their culture and now the principles of their GNH movement all have fostered a sense of gratitude about what they do have.
How many of us here, as TEDsters in the audience, spend more of our time in the bottom half of this equation, in the denominator?
We are a bottom-heavy culture in more ways than one.
(Laughter) The reality is, in Western countries, quite often we do focus on the pursuit of happiness as if happiness is something that we have to go out -- an object that we're supposed to get, or maybe many objects.
Actually, in fact, if you look in the dictionary, many dictionaries define pursuit as to "chase with hostility."
Do we pursue happiness with hostility?
Good question. But back to Bhutan.
Bhutan's bordered on its north and south by 38 percent of the world's population.
Could this little country, like a startup in a mature industry, be the spark plug that influences a 21st century of middle-class in China and India?
Bhutan's created the ultimate export, a new global currency of well-being, and there are 40 countries around the world today that are studying their own GNH.
You may have heard, this last fall Nicolas Sarkozy in France announcing the results of an 18-month study by two Nobel economists, focusing on happiness and wellness in France.
Sarkozy suggested that world leaders should stop myopically focusing on GDP and consider a new index, what some French are calling a "joie de vivre index."
I like it.
Co-branding opportunities.
Just three days ago, three days ago here at TED, we had a simulcast of David Cameron, potentially the next prime minister of the UK, quoting one of my favorite speeches of all-time, Robert Kennedy's poetic speech from 1968 when he suggested that we're myopically focused on the wrong thing and that GDP is a misplaced metric.
So it suggests that the momentum is shifting.
I've taken that Robert Kennedy quote, and I've turned it into a new balance sheet for just a moment here.
This is a collection of things that Robert Kennedy said in that quote.
GDP counts everything from air pollution to the destruction of our redwoods.
But it doesn't count the health of our children or the integrity of our public officials.
As you look at these two columns here, doesn't it make you feel like it's time for us to start figuring out a new way to count, a new way to imagine what's important to us in life?
(Applause) Certainly Robert Kennedy suggested at the end of the speech exactly that.
He said GDP "measures everything in short, except that which makes life worthwhile."
Wow.
So how do we do that?
Let me say one thing we can just start doing ten years from now, at least in this country.
Why in the heck in America are we doing a census in 2010?
We're spending 10 billion dollars on the census.
We're asking 10 simple questions -- it is simplicity.
But all of those questions are tangible.
They're about demographics.
They're about where you live, how many people you live with, and whether you own your home or not.
That's about it.
We're not asking meaningful metrics.
We're not asking important questions.
We're not asking anything that's intangible.
Abe Maslow said long ago something you've heard before, but you didn't realize it was him.
He said, "If the only tool you have is a hammer, everything starts to look like a nail."
We've been fooled by our tool.
Excuse that expression.
(Laughter) We've been fooled by our tool.
GDP has been our hammer.
And our nail has been a 19th- and 20th-century industrial-era model of success.
And yet, 64 percent of the world's GDP today is in that intangible industry we call service, the service industry, the industry I'm in.
And only 36 percent is in the tangible industries of manufacturing and agriculture.
So maybe it's time that we get a bigger toolbox, right?
Maybe it's time we get a toolbox that doesn't just count what's easily counted, the tangible in life, but actually counts what we most value, the things that are intangible.
I guess I'm sort of a curious CEO.
I was also a curious economics major as an undergrad.
I learned that economists measure everything in tangible units of production and consumption as if each of those tangible units is exactly the same.
They aren't the same.
In fact, as leaders, what we need to learn is that we can influence the quality of that unit of production by creating the conditions for our employees to live their calling.
In Vivian's case, her unit of production isn't the tangible hours she works, it's the intangible difference she makes during that one hour of work.
This is Dave Arringdale who's actually been a longtime guest at Vivian's motel.
He stayed there a hundred times in the last 20 years, and he's loyal to the property because of the relationship that Vivian and her fellow employees have created with him.
They've created a habitat of happiness for Dave.
He tells me that he can always count on Vivian and the staff there to make him feel at home.
Why is it that business leaders and investors quite often don't see the connection between creating the intangible of employee happiness with creating the tangible of financial profits in their business?
We don't have to choose between inspired employees and sizable profits, we can have both.
In fact, inspired employees quite often help make sizable profits, right?
So what the world needs now, in my opinion, is business leaders and political leaders who know what to count.
We count numbers.
We count on people.
What really counts is when we actually use our numbers to truly take into account our people.
I learned that from a maid in a motel and a king of a country.
What can you start counting today?
What one thing can you start counting today that actually would be meaningful in your life, whether it's your work life or your business life?
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
This is me. My name is Ben Saunders.
I specialize in dragging heavy things around cold places.
On May 11th last year, I stood alone at the North geographic Pole.
I was the only human being in an area one-and-a-half times the size of America, five-and-a-half thousand square miles.
More than 2,000 people have climbed Everest.
12 people have stood on the moon.
Including me, only four people have skied solo to the North Pole.
And I think the reason for that -- (Applause) -- thank you -- I think the reason for that is that it's -- it's -- well, it's as Chris said, bonkers.
It's a journey that is right at the limit of human capability.
I skied the equivalent of 31 marathons back to back. 800 miles in 10 weeks.
And I was dragging all the food I needed, the supplies, the equipment, sleeping bag, one change of underwear -- everything I needed for nearly three months.
(Laughter) What we're going to try and do today, in the 16 and a bit minutes I've got left, is to try and answer three questions. The first one is, why?
The second one is, how do you go to the loo at minus 40?
"Ben, I've read somewhere that at minus 40, exposed skin becomes frostbitten in less than a minute, so how do you answer the call of nature?"
I don't want to answer these now. I'll come on to them at the end.
Third one: how do you top that? What's next?
It all started back in 2001.
My first expedition was with a guy called Pen Hadow -- enormously experienced chap.
This was like my polar apprenticeship.
We were trying to ski from this group of islands up here, Severnaya Zemlya, to the North Pole.
And the thing that fascinates me about the North Pole, geographic North Pole, is that it's slap bang in the middle of the sea.
This is about as good as maps get, and to reach it you've got to ski literally over the frozen crust, the floating skin of ice on the Artic Ocean.
I'd spoken to all the experts.
I'd read lots of books. I studied maps and charts.
But I realized on the morning of day one that I had no idea exactly what I'd let myself in for.
I was 23 years old. No one my age had attempted anything like this, and pretty quickly, almost everything that could have gone wrong did go wrong.
We were attacked by a polar bear on day two.
I had frostbite in my left big toe.
We started running very low on food. We were both pretty hungry, losing lots of weight.
Some very unusual weather conditions, very difficult ice conditions.
We had decidedly low-tech communications.
We couldn't afford a satellite phone, so we had HF radio.
You can see two ski poles sticking out of the roof of the tent.
There's a wire dangling down either side.
That was our HF radio antenna.
We had less than two hours two-way communication with the outside world in two months.
Ultimately, we ran out of time.
We'd skied 400 miles. We were just over 200 miles left to go to the Pole, and we'd run out of time.
We were too late into the summer; the ice was starting to melt; we spoke to the Russian helicopter pilots on the radio, and they said, "Look boys, you've run out of time.
We've got to pick you up."
And I felt that I had failed, wholeheartedly.
I was a failure.
The one goal, the one dream I'd had for as long as I could remember -- I hadn't even come close.
And skiing along that first trip, I had two imaginary video clips that I'd replay over and over again in my mind when the going got tough, just to keep my motivation going.
The first one was reaching the Pole itself.
I could see vividly, I suppose, being filmed out of the door of a helicopter, there was, kind of, rock music playing in the background, and I had a ski pole with a Union Jack, you know, flying in the wind.
I could see myself sticking the flag in a pole, you know -- ah, glorious moment -- the music kind of reaching a crescendo.
The second video clip that I imagined was getting back to Heathrow airport, and I could see again, vividly, the camera flashbulbs going off, the paparazzi, the autograph hunters, the book agents coming to sign me up for a deal.
And of course, neither of these things happened.
We didn't get to the Pole, and we didn't have any money to pay anyone to do the PR, so no one had heard of this expedition.
And I got back to Heathrow. My mum was there; my brother was there; my granddad was there -- had a little Union Jack -- (Laughter) -- and that was about it. I went back to live with my mum.
I was physically exhausted, mentally an absolute wreck, considered myself a failure.
In a huge amount of debt personally to this expedition, and lying on my mum's sofa, day in day out, watching daytime TV.
My brother sent me a text message, an SMS -- it was a quote from the "Simpsons." It said, "You tried your hardest and failed miserably.
The lesson is: don't even try."
(Laughter) Fast forward three years. I did eventually get off the sofa, and start planning another expedition. This time, I wanted to go right across, on my own this time, from Russia, at the top of the map, to the North Pole, where the sort of kink in the middle is, and then on to Canada.
No one has made a complete crossing of the Arctic Ocean on their own.
Two Norwegians did it as a team in 2000. No one's done it solo.
Very famous, very accomplished Italian mountaineer, Reinhold Messner, tried it in 1995, and he was rescued after a week.
He described this expedition as 10 times as dangerous as Everest.
So for some reason, this was what I wanted to have a crack at, but I knew that even to stand a chance of getting home in one piece, let alone make it across to Canada, I had to take a radical approach.
This meant everything from perfecting the sawn-off, sub-two-gram toothbrush, to working with one of the world's leading nutritionists in developing a completely new, revolutionary nutritional strategy from scratch: 6,000 calories a day.
And the expedition started in February last year.
Big support team. We had a film crew, a couple of logistics people with us, my girlfriend, a photographer.
At first it was pretty sensible. We flew British Airways to Moscow.
The next bit in Siberia to Krasnoyarsk, on a Russian internal airline called KrasAir, spelled K-R-A-S.
The next bit, we'd chartered a pretty elderly Russian plane to fly us up to a town called Khatanga, which was the sort of last bit of civilization.
Our cameraman, who it turned out was a pretty nervous flier at the best of times, actually asked the pilot, before we got on the plane, how long this flight would take, and the pilot -- Russian pilot -- completely deadpan, replied, "Six hours -- if we live."
(Laughter) We got to Khatanga.
I think the joke is that Khatanga isn't the end of the world, but you can see it from there.
(Laughter) It was supposed to be an overnight stay. We were stuck there for 10 days.
There was a kind of vodka-fueled pay dispute between the helicopter pilots and the people that owned the helicopter, so we were stuck. We couldn't move.
Finally, morning of day 11, we got the all-clear, loaded up the helicopters -- two helicopters flying in tandem -- dropped me off at the edge of the pack ice.
We had a frantic sort of 45 minutes of filming, photography; while the helicopter was still there, I did an interview on the satellite phone; and then everyone else climbed back into the helicopter, wham, the door closed, and I was alone.
And I don't know if words will ever quite do that moment justice.
All I could think about was running back up to the door, banging on the door, and saying, "Look guys, I haven't quite thought this through."
(Laughter) To make things worse, you can just see the white dot up at the top right hand side of the screen; that's a full moon.
Because we'd been held up in Russia, of course, the full moon brings the highest and lowest tides; when you're standing on the frozen surface of the sea, high and low tides generally mean that interesting things are going to happen -- the ice is going to start moving around a bit.
I was, you can see there, pulling two sledges.
Grand total in all, 95 days of food and fuel, 180 kilos -- that's almost exactly 400 pounds.
When the ice was flat or flattish, I could just about pull both.
When the ice wasn't flat, I didn't have a hope in hell.
I had to pull one, leave it, and go back and get the other one.
Literally scrambling through what's called pressure ice -- the ice had been smashed up under the pressure of the currents of the ocean, the wind and the tides.
NASA described the ice conditions last year as the worst since records began.
And it's always drifting. The pack ice is always drifting.
I was skiing into headwinds for nine out of the 10 weeks I was alone last year, and I was drifting backwards most of the time.
My record was minus 2.5 miles.
I got up in the morning, took the tent down, skied north for seven-and-a-half hours, put the tent up, and I was two and a half miles further back than when I'd started.
I literally couldn't keep up with the drift of the ice.
(Video): So it's day 22.
I'm lying in the tent, getting ready to go.
The weather is just appalling -- oh, drifted back about five miles in the last -- last night.
Later in the expedition, the problem was no longer the ice.
It was a lack of ice -- open water.
I knew this was happening. I knew the Artic was warming.
I knew there was more open water. And I had a secret weapon up my sleeve.
This was my little bit of bio-mimicry.
Polar bears on the Artic Ocean move in dead straight lines.
If they come to water, they'll climb in, swim across it.
So we had a dry suit developed -- I worked with a team in Norway -- based on a sort of survival suit -- I suppose, that helicopter pilots would wear -- that I could climb into. It would go on over my boots, over my mittens, it would pull up around my face, and seal pretty tightly around my face.
And this meant I could ski over very thin ice, and if I fell through, it wasn't the end of the world.
It also meant, if the worst came to the worst, I could actually jump in and swim across and drag the sledge over after me.
Some pretty radical technology, a radical approach --but it worked perfectly.
Another exciting thing we did last year was with communications technology.
In 1912, Shackleton's Endurance expedition -- there was -- one of his crew, a guy called Thomas Orde-Lees.
He said, "The explorers of 2012, if there is anything left to explore, will no doubt carry pocket wireless telephones fitted with wireless telescopes."
Well, Orde-Lees guessed wrong by about eight years. This is my pocket wireless telephone, Iridium satellite phone.
The wireless telescope was a digital camera I had tucked in my pocket.
And every single day of the 72 days I was alone on the ice, I was blogging live from my tent, sending back a little diary piece, sending back information on the distance I'd covered -- the ice conditions, the temperature -- and a daily photo.
Remember, 2001, we had less than two hours radio contact with the outside world.
Last year, blogging live from an expedition that's been described as 10 times as dangerous as Everest.
It wasn't all high-tech. This is navigating in what's called a whiteout.
When you get lots of mist, low cloud, the wind starts blowing the snow up.
You can't see an awful lot. You can just see, there's a yellow ribbon tied to one of my ski poles.
I'd navigate using the direction of the wind.
So, kind of a weird combination of high-tech and low-tech.
I got to the Pole on the 11th of May.
It took me 68 days to get there from Russia, and there is nothing there.
(Laughter).
There isn't even a pole at the Pole. There's nothing there, purely because it's sea ice. It's drifting.
Stick a flag there, leave it there, pretty soon it will drift off, usually towards Canada or Greenland.
I knew this, but I was expecting something.
Strange mixture of feelings: it was extremely warm by this stage, a lot of open water around, and of course, elated that I'd got there under my own steam, but starting to really realize that my chances of making it all the way across to Canada, which was still 400 miles away, were slim at best.
The only proof I've got that I was there is a blurry photo of my GPS, the little satellite navigation gadget.
You can just see -- there's a nine and a string of zeros here.
Ninety degrees north -- that is slap bang in the North Pole.
I took a photo of that. Sat down on my sledge. Did a sort of video diary piece.
Took a few photos. I got my satellite phone out.
I warmed the battery up in my armpit.
I dialed three numbers. I dialed my mum.
I dialed my girlfriend. I dialed the CEO of my sponsor.
And I got three voicemails.
(Laughter) (Video): Ninety.
It's a special feeling.
The entire planet is rotating beneath my feet.
The -- the whole world underneath me.
I finally got through to my mum. She was at the queue of the supermarket.
She started crying. She asked me to call her back.
(Laughter) I skied on for a week past the Pole.
I wanted to get as close to Canada as I could before conditions just got too dangerous to continue.
This was the last day I had on the ice.
When I spoke to the -- my project management team, they said, "Look, Ben, conditions are getting too dangerous.
There are huge areas of open water just south of your position.
We'd like to pick you up.
Ben, could you please look for an airstrip?"
This was the view outside my tent when I had this fateful phone call.
I'd never tried to build an airstrip before. Tony, the expedition manager, he said, "Look Ben, you've got to find 500 meters of flat, thick safe ice."
The only bit of ice I could find -- it took me 36 hours of skiing around trying to find an airstrip -- was exactly 473 meters. I could measure it with my skis.
I didn't tell Tony that. I didn't tell the pilots that.
I thought, it'll have to do.
(Video): Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh.
It just about worked. A pretty dramatic landing -- the plane actually passed over four times, and I was a bit worried it wasn't going to land at all.
The pilot, I knew, was called Troy. I was expecting someone called Troy that did this for a living to be a pretty tough kind of guy.
I was bawling my eyes out by the time the plane landed -- a pretty emotional moment.
So I thought, I've got to compose myself for Troy.
I'm supposed to be the roughty toughty explorer type.
The plane taxied up to where I was standing.
The door opened. This guy jumped out. He's about that tall. He said, "Hi, my name is Troy."
(Laughter).
The co-pilot was a lady called Monica.
She sat there in a sort of hand-knitted jumper.
They were the least macho people I've ever met, but they made my day.
Troy was smoking a cigarette on the ice; we took a few photos. He climbed up the ladder. He said, "Just -- just get in the back."
He threw his cigarette out as he got on the front, and I climbed in the back.
(Laughter) Taxied up and down the runway a few times, just to flatten it out a bit, and he said, "Right, I'm going to -- I'm going to give it a go." And he -- I've now learned that this is standard practice, but it had me worried at the time.
He put his hand on the throttle.
You can see the control for the engines is actually on the roof of the cockpit.
It's that little bar there. He put his hand on the throttle.
Monica very gently put her hand sort of on top of his.
I thought, "God, here we go. We're, we're -- this is all or nothing."
Rammed it forwards. Bounced down the runway. Just took off.
One of the skis just clipped a pressure ridge at the end of the runway, banking. I could see into the cockpit, Troy battling the controls, and he just took one hand off, reached back, flipped a switch on the roof of the cockpit, and it was the "fasten seat belt" sign you can see on the wall.
(Laughter) And only from the air did I see the big picture.
Of course, when you're on the ice, you only ever see one obstacle at a time, whether it's a pressure ridge or there's a bit of water.
This is probably why I didn't get into trouble about the length of my airstrip.
I mean, it really was starting to break up.
Why? I'm not an explorer in the traditional sense.
I'm not skiing along drawing maps; everyone knows where the North Pole is.
At the South Pole there's a big scientific base. There's an airstrip.
There's a cafe and there's a tourist shop.
For me, this is about exploring human limits, about exploring the limits of physiology, of psychology and of technology. They're the things that excite me.
And it's also about potential, on a personal level.
This, for me, is a chance to explore the limits -- really push the limits of my own potential, see how far they stretch.
And on a wider scale, it amazes me how people go through life just scratching the surface of their potential, just doing three or four or five percent of what they're truly capable of. So, on a wider scale, I hope that this journey was a chance to inspire other people to think about what they want to do with their potential, and what they want to do with the tiny amount of time we each have on this planet.
That's as close as I can come to summing that up.
The next question is, how do you answer the call of nature at minus 40?
The answer, of course, to which is a trade secret -- and the last question, what's next? As quickly as possible, if I have a minute left at the end, I'll go into more detail.
What's next: Antarctica.
It's the coldest, highest, windiest and driest continent on Earth.
Late 1911, early 1912, there was a race to be the first to the South Pole: the heart of the Antarctic continent.
If you include the coastal ice shelves, you can see that the Ross Ice Shelf -- it's the big one down here -- the Ross Ice Shelf is the size of France.
Antarctica, if you include the ice shelves, is twice the size of Australia -- it's a big place.
And there's a race to get to the Pole between Amundsen, the Norwegian -- Amundsen had dog sleds and huskies -- and Scott, the British guy, Captain Scott.
Scott had sort of ponies and some tractors and a few dogs, all of which went wrong, and Scott and his team of four people ended up on foot.
They got to the Pole late January 1912 to find a Norwegian flag already there.
There was a tent, a letter to the Norwegian king.
And they turned around, headed back to the coast, and all five of them died on the return journey.
Since then, no one has ever skied -- this was 93 years ago -- since then, no one has ever skied from the coast of Antarctica to the Pole and back.
Every South Pole expedition you may have heard about is either flown out from the Pole or has used vehicles or dogs or kites to do some kind of crossing -- no one has ever made a return journey. So that's the plan.
Two of us are doing it.
That's pretty much it.
One final thought before I get to the toilet bit, is -- is, I have a -- and I meant to scan this and I've forgotten -- but I have a -- I have a school report. I was 13 years old, and it's framed above my desk at home. It says, "Ben lacks sufficient impetus to achieve anything worthwhile."
(Laughter) (Applause) I think if I've learned anything, it's this: that no one else is the authority on your potential.
You're the only person that decides how far you go and what you're capable of.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's my story.
Thank you very much.
I'm going to begin by reciting a poem.
"Oh beloved dentist: Your rubber fingers in my mouth ...
your voice so soft and muffled ...
Lower the mask, dear dentist, lower the mask."
(Laughter) Okay, in this presentation, I'm going to be putting the right side of your brains through a fairly serious workout.
You're going to see a lot of imagery, and it's not always connected to what I'm talking about, so I need you to kind of split your brains in half and let the images flow over one side and listen to me on the other.
So I am one of those people with a transformative personal story.
Six years ago, after 20 years in graphic design and typography, I changed the way I was working and the way most graphic designers work to pursue a more personal approach to my work, with only the humble attempt to simply make a living doing something that I loved.
But something weird happened.
I became bizarrely popular.
My current work seems to resonate with people in a way that has so taken me by surprise that I still frequently wonder what in the hell is going on.
And I'm slowly coming to understand that the appeal of what I do may be connected to why I do it.
These days, I call myself a graphic artist.
So where my work as a graphic designer was to follow strategy, my work now follows my heart and my interests with the guidance of my ego to create work that is mutually beneficial to myself and a client.
Now, this is heresy in the design world.
The ego is not supposed to be involved in graphic design.
But I find that for myself, without exception, the more I deal with the work as something of my own, as something that is personal, the more successful it is as something that's compelling, interesting and sustaining.
So I exist somewhat outside of the mainstream of design thinking.
Where others might look at measurable results, I tend to be interested in more ethereal qualities, like "Does it bring joy?"
"Is there a sense of wonder?"
and "Does it invoke curiosity?"
This is a scientific diagram, by the way.
I don't have time to explain it, but it has to do with DNA and RNA.
So I have a particular imaginative approach to visual work.
The things that interest me when I'm working are visual structure, surprise and anything that requires figuring things out.
So for this reason, I'm particularly drawn to systems and patterns.
I'm going to give you a couple of examples of how my brain works.
This is a piece that I did for The Guardian newspaper in the U.K.
They have a magazine that they call G2.
And this is for their puzzle special in 2007.
And puzzling it is.
I started by creating a series of tiling units.
And these tiling units, I designed specifically so that they would contain parts of letterforms within their shapes so that I could then join those pieces together to create letters and then words within the abstract patterning.
But then as well, I was able to just flip them, rotate them and combine them in different ways to create either regular patterns or abstract patterns.
So here's the word puzzle again.
And here it is with the abstract surrounding.
And as you can see, it's extremely difficult to read.
But all I have to do is fill certain areas of those letterforms and I can bring those words out of the background pattern.
But maybe that's a little too obvious.
So then I can add some color in with the background and add a bit more color in with the words themselves, and this way, working with the art director, I'm able to bring it to just the right point that it's puzzling for the audience -- they can figure out that there's something they have to read -- but it's not impossible for them to read.
I'm also interested in working with unusual materials and common materials in unusual ways.
So this requires figuring out how to get the most out of something's innate properties and also how to bend it to my will.
So ultimately, my goal is to create something unexpected.
To this end, I have worked in sugar for Stefan Sagmeister, three-time TED speaker.
And this project began essentially on my kitchen table.
I've been eating cereal for breakfast all of my life.
And for that same amount of time, I've been spilling sugar on the table and just kind of playing with it with my fingers.
And eventually I used this technique to create a piece of artwork.
And then I used it again to create six pieces for Stefan's book, "Things in My Life I've Learned So Far."
And these were created without sketches, just freehand, by putting the sugar down on a white surface and then manipulating it to get the words and designs out of it.
Recently, I've also made some rather highbrow baroque borders out of lowbrow pasta.
And this is for a chapter that I'm doing in a book, and the chapter is on honor.
So it's a little bit unexpected, but, in a way, it refers to the macaroni art that children make for their parents or they make in school and give to their parents, which is in itself a form of honor.
This is what you can do with some household tinfoil.
Okay, well, it's what I can do with some household tinfoil.
(Laughter) I'm very interested in wonder, in design as an impetus to inquiring.
To say I wonder is to say I question, I ask.
And to experience wonder is to experience awe.
So I'm currently working on a book, which plays with both senses of the word, as I explore some of my own ideas and inquiries in a visual display of rather peacock-like grandeur.
The world is full of wonder.
But the world of graphic design, for the most part, is not.
So I'm using my own writings as a kind of testing ground for a book that has an interdependency between word and image as a kind of seductive force.
I think that one of the things that religions got right was the use of visual wonder to deliver a message.
I think this true marriage of art and information is woefully underused in adult literature, and I'm mystified as to why visual wealth is not more commonly used to enhance intellectual wealth.
When we look at works like this, we tend to associate them with children's literature.
There's an implication that ornamental graphics detract from the seriousness of the content.
But I really hope to have the opportunity to change that perception.
This book is taking rather a long time, but I'm nearly done.
For some reason, I thought it would be a good idea to put an intermission in my talk.
And this is it -- just to give you and me a moment to catch up.
(Laughter) So I do these valentines.
I've been sending out valentines on a fairly large scale since 2005.
These are my valentines from 2005 and 2006.
And I started by doing just a single image like this and sending them out to each person.
But in 2007, I got the cockamamie idea to hand-draw each valentine for everyone on my mailing list.
I reduced my mailing list to 150 people.
And I drew each person their own unique valentine and put their name on it and numbered it and signed it and sent it out.
Believe it or not, I devised this as a timesaving method.
I was very busy in the beginning of that year, and I didn't know when I was going to find time to design and print a single valentine.
And I thought that I could kind of do this piecemeal as I was traveling.
It didn't exactly work out that way.
There's a longer story to this, but I did get them all done in time, and they were extremely well received.
I got an almost 100 percent response rate.
(Laughter) And those who didn't respond will never receive anything from me ever again.
(Laughter) Last year, I took a more conceptual approach to the valentine.
I had this idea that I wanted people to receive a kind of mysterious love letter, like a found fragment in their mailbox.
I wanted it to be something that was not addressed to them or signed by me, something that caused them to wonder what on Earth this thing was.
And I specifically wrote four pages that don't connect.
There were four different versions of this.
And I wrote them so that they begin in the middle of a sentence, end in the middle of a sentence.
And they're on the one hand, universal, so I avoid specific names or places, but on the other hand, they're personal.
So I wanted people to really get the sense that they had received something that could have been a love letter to them.
And I'm just going to read one of them to you.
"You've never really been sure of this, but I can assure you that this quirk you're so self-conscious of is intensely endearing.
Just please accept that this piece of you escapes with your smile, and those of us who notice are happy to catch it in passing.
Time spent with you is like chasing and catching small birds, but without the scratches and bird shit."
(Laughter) "That is to say, your thoughts and words flit and dart, disconcertedly elusive at times, but when caught and examined -- ahh, such a wonder, such a delightful reward.
There's no passing time with you, only collecting -- the collecting of moments with the hope for preservation and at the same time release.
Impossible? I don't think so.
I know this makes you embarrassed.
I'm certain I can see you blushing.
But I just have to tell you because sometimes I hear your self-doubt, and it's so crushing to think that you may not know how truly wonderful you are, how inspiring and delightful and really, truly the most completely ..."
(Laughter) (Applause) So Valentine's Day is coming up in a couple of days, and these are currently arriving in mailboxes all around the world.
This year, I got, what I really have to say is a rather brilliant idea, to laser cut my valentines out of used Christmas cards.
So I solicited friends to send me their used Christmas cards, and I made 500 of these.
Each one of them is completely different.
I'm just really, really thrilled with them.
I don't have that much else to say, but they turned out really well.
I do spend a lot of time on my work.
And one of the things that I've been thinking about recently is what is worth while.
What is it that's worth spending my time on and my life on in this way?
Working in the commercial world, this is something that I do have to struggle with at times.
And yes, sometimes I'm swayed by money.
But ultimately, I don't consider that a worthy goal.
What makes something worthwhile for me is the people I work for or with, the conditions I work under and the audience that I'm able to reach.
So I might ask: "Who is it for?"
"What does it say?"
and "What does it do?"
You know, I have to tell you, it's really difficult for someone like me to come up on stage at this conference with these unbelievably brilliant minds, who are thinking these really big-picture, world-changing, life-changing ideas and technologies.
And it's very, very common for designers and people in the visual arts to feel that we're not contributing enough, or worse, that all we're doing is contributing to landfill.
Here I am; I'm showing you some pretty visuals and talking about aesthetics.
But I've come to believe that truly imaginative visual work is extremely important in society.
Just in the way that I'm inspired by books and magazines of all kinds, conversations I have, movies, so I also think, when I put visual work out there into the mass media, work that is interesting, unusual, intriguing, work that maybe opens up that sense of inquiry in the mind, that I'm seeding the imagination of the populace.
And you just never know who is going to take something from that and turn it into something else, because inspiration is cross-pollinating.
So a piece of mine may inspire a playwright or a novelist or a scientist, and that in turn may be the seed that inspires a doctor or a philanthropist or a babysitter.
And this isn't something that you can quantify or track or measure, and we tend to undervalue things in society that we can't measure.
But I really believe that a fully operating, rich society needs these seeds coming from all directions and all disciplines in order to keep the gears of inspiration and imagination flowing and cycling and growing.
So that's why I do what I do, and why I spend so much time and effort on it, and why I work in the commercial, public sphere, as opposed to the isolated, private sphere of fine art: because I want as many people as possible to see my work, notice it, be drawn into it, and be able to take something from it.
And I actually really feel that it's worthwhile to spend my valuable and limited time on this Earth in this way.
And I thank you for allowing me to show it to you.
(Applause)
It's a great pleasure to be here.
It's a great pleasure to speak after Brian Cox from CERN.
I think CERN is the home of the Large Hadron Collider.
What ever happened to the Small Hadron Collider?
Where is the Small Hadron Collider?
Because the Small Hadron Collider once was the big thing.
Now, the Small Hadron Collider is in a cupboard, overlooked and neglected.
You know when the Large Hadron Collider started, and it didn't work, and people tried to work out why, it was the Small Hadron Collider team who sabotaged it because they were so jealous.
The whole Hadron Collider family needs unlocking.
The lesson of Brian's presentation, in a way -- all those fantastic pictures -- is this really: that vantage point determines everything that you see.
What Brian was saying was science has opened up successively different vantage points from which we can see ourselves, and that's why it's so valuable.
So the vantage point you take determines virtually everything that you will see.
The question that you will ask will determine much of the answer that you get.
And so if you ask this question: Where would you look to see the future of education?
The answer that we've traditionally given to that is very straightforward, at least in the last 20 years: You go to Finland.
Finland is the best place in the world to see school systems.
The Finns may be a bit boring and depressive and there's a very high suicide rate, but by golly, they are qualified.
And they have absolutely amazing education systems.
So we all troop off to Finland, and we wonder at the social democratic miracle of Finland and its cultural homogeneity and all the rest of it, and then we struggle to imagine how we might bring lessons back.
Well, so, for this last year, with the help of Cisco who sponsored me, for some balmy reason, to do this, I've been looking somewhere else.
Because actually radical innovation does sometimes come from the very best, but it often comes from places where you have huge need -- unmet, latent demand -- and not enough resources for traditional solutions to work -- traditional, high-cost solutions, which depend on professionals, which is what schools and hospitals are.
So I ended up in places like this.
This is a place called Monkey Hill.
It's one of the hundreds of favelas in Rio.
Most of the population growth of the next 50 years will be in cities.
We'll grow by six cities of 12 million people a year for the next 30 years.
Almost all of that growth will be in the developed world.
Almost all of that growth will be in places like Monkey Hill.
This is where you'll find the fastest growing young populations of the world.
So if you want recipes to work -- for virtually anything -- health, education, government politics and education -- you have to go to these places.
And if you go to these places, you meet people like this.
This is a guy called Juanderson.
At the age of 14, in common with many 14-year-olds in the Brazilian education system, he dropped out of school.
It was boring.
And Juanderson, instead, went into what provided kind of opportunity and hope in the place that he lived, which was the drugs trade.
And by the age of 16, with rapid promotion, he was running the drugs trade in 10 favelas.
He was turning over 200,000 dollars a week.
He employed 200 people.
He was going to be dead by the age of 25.
And luckily, he met this guy, who is Rodrigo Baggio, the owner of the first laptop to ever appear in Brazil.
1994, Rodrigo started something called CDI, which took computers donated by corporations, put them into community centers in favelas and created places like this.
What turned Juanderson around was technology for learning that made learning fun and accessible.
Or you can go to places like this.
This is Kibera, which is the largest slum in East Africa.
Millions of people living here, stretched over many kilometers.
And there I met these two, Azra on the left, Maureen on the right.
They just finished their Kenyan certificate of secondary education.
That name should tell you that the Kenyan education system borrows almost everything from Britain, circa 1950, but has managed to make it even worse.
So there are schools in slums like this.
They're places like this.
That's where Maureen went to school.
They're private schools. There are no state schools in slums.
And the education they got was pitiful.
It was in places like this. This a school set up by some nuns in another slum called Nakuru.
Half the children in this classroom have no parents because they've died through AIDS.
The other half have one parent because the other parent has died through AIDS.
So the challenges of education in this kind of place are not to learn the kings and queens of Kenya or Britain.
They are to stay alive, to earn a living, to not become HIV positive.
The one technology that spans rich and poor in places like this is not anything to do with industrial technology.
It's not to do with electricity or water.
It's the mobile phone.
If you want to design from scratch virtually any service in Africa, you would start now with the mobile phone.
Or you could go to places like this.
This is a place called the Madangiri Settlement Colony, which is a very developed slum about 25 minutes outside New Delhi, where I met these characters who showed me around for the day.
The remarkable thing about these girls, and the sign of the kind of social revolution sweeping through the developing world is that these girls are not married.
Ten years ago, they certainly would have been married.
Now they're not married, and they want to go on to study further, to have a career.
They've been brought up by mothers who are illiterate, who have never ever done homework.
All across the developing world there are millions of parents -- tens, hundreds of millions -- who for the first time are with children doing homework and exams.
And the reason they carry on studying is not because they went to a school like this.
This is a private school.
This is a fee-pay school. This is a good school.
This is the best you can get in Hyderabad in Indian education.
The reason they went on studying was this.
This is a computer installed in the entrance to their slum by a revolutionary social entrepreneur called Sugata Mitra who has conducted the most radical experiments, showing that children, in the right conditions, can learn on their own with the help of computers.
Those girls have never touched Google.
They know nothing about Wikipedia.
Imagine what their lives would be like if you could get that to them.
So if you look, as I did, through this tour, and by looking at about a hundred case studies of different social entrepreneurs working in these very extreme conditions, look at the recipes that they come up with for learning, they look nothing like school.
What do they look like?
Well, education is a global religion.
And education, plus technology, is a great source of hope.
You can go to places like this.
This is a school three hours outside of Sao Paulo.
Most of the children there have parents who are illiterate.
Many of them don't have electricity at home.
But they find it completely obvious to use computers, websites, make videos, so on and so forth.
When you go to places like this what you see is that education in these settings works by pull, not push.
Most of our education system is push.
I was literally pushed to school.
When you get to school, things are pushed at you: knowledge, exams, systems, timetables.
If you want to attract people like Juanderson who could, for instance, buy guns, wear jewelry, ride motorbikes and get girls through the drugs trade, and you want to attract him into education, having a compulsory curriculum doesn't really make sense.
That isn't really going to attract him.
You need to pull him.
And so education needs to work by pull, not push.
And so the idea of a curriculum is completely irrelevant in a setting like this.
You need to start education from things that make a difference to them in their settings.
What does that?
Well, the key is motivation, and there are two aspects to it.
One is to deliver extrinsic motivation, that education has a payoff.
Our education systems all work on the principle that there is a payoff, but you have to wait quite a long time.
That's too long if you're poor.
Waiting 10 years for the payoff from education is too long when you need to meet daily needs, when you've got siblings to look after or a business to help with.
So you need education to be relevant and help people to make a living there and then, often.
And you also need to make it intrinsically interesting.
So time and again, I found people like this.
This is an amazing guy, Sebastiao Rocha, in Belo Horizonte, in the third largest city in Brazil.
He's invented more than 200 games to teach virtually any subject under the sun.
In the schools and communities that Taio works in, the day always starts in a circle and always starts from a question.
Imagine an education system that started from questions, not from knowledge to be imparted, or started from a game, not from a lesson, or started from the premise that you have to engage people first before you can possibly teach them.
Our education systems, you do all that stuff afterward, if you're lucky, sport, drama, music.
These things, they teach through.
They attract people to learning because it's really a dance project or a circus project or, the best example of all -- El Sistema in Venezuela -- it's a music project.
And so you attract people through that into learning, not adding that on after all the learning has been done and you've eaten your cognitive greens.
So El Sistema in Venezuela uses a violin as a technology of learning.
Taio Rocha uses making soap as a technology of learning.
And what you find when you go to these schemes is that they use people and places in incredibly creative ways.
Masses of peer learning.
How do you get learning to people when there are no teachers, when teachers won't come, when you can't afford them, and even if you do get teachers, what they teach isn't relevant to the communities that they serve?
Well, you create your own teachers.
You create peer-to-peer learning, or you create para-teachers, or you bring in specialist skills.
But you find ways to get learning that's relevant to people through technology, people and places that are different.
So this is a school in a bus on a building site in Pune, the fastest growing city in Asia.
Pune has 5,000 building sites.
It has 30,000 children on those building sites.
That's one city.
Imagine that urban explosion that's going to take place across the developing world and how many thousands of children will spend their school years on building sites.
Well, this is a very simple scheme to get the learning to them through a bus.
And they all treat learning, not as some sort of academic, analytical activity, but as that's something that's productive, something you make, something that you can do, perhaps earn a living from.
So I met this character, Steven.
He'd spent three years in Nairobi living on the streets because his parents had died of AIDS.
And he was finally brought back into school, not by the offer of GCSEs, but by the offer of learning how to become a carpenter, a practical making skill.
So the trendiest schools in the world, High Tech High and others, they espouse a philosophy of learning as productive activity.
Here, there isn't really an option.
Learning has to be productive in order for it to make sense.
And finally, they have a different model of scale, and it's a Chinese restaurant model of how to scale.
And I learned it from this guy, who is an amazing character.
He's probably the most remarkable social entrepreneur in education in the world.
His name is Madhav Chavan, and he created something called Pratham.
And Pratham runs preschool play groups for, now, 21 million children in India.
It's the largest NGO in education in the world.
And it also supports working-class kids going into Indian schools.
He's a complete revolutionary.
He's actually a trade union organizer by background, and that's how he learned the skills to build his organization.
When they got to a certain stage, Pratham got big enough to attract some pro bono support from McKinsey.
McKinsey came along and looked at his model and said, "You know what you should do with this, Madhav?
You should turn it into McDonald's.
And what you do when you go to any new site is you kind of roll out a franchise.
And it's the same wherever you go.
It's reliable and people know exactly where they are.
And there will be no mistakes."
And Madhav said, "Why do we have to do it that way?
Why can't we do it more like the Chinese restaurants?"
There are Chinese restaurants everywhere, but there is no Chinese restaurant chain.
Yet, everyone knows what is a Chinese restaurant.
They know what to expect, even though it'll be subtly different and the colors will be different and the name will be different.
You know a Chinese restaurant when you see it.
These people work with the Chinese restaurant model -- same principles, different applications and different settings -- not the McDonald's model.
The McDonald's model scales.
The Chinese restaurant model spreads.
So mass education started with social entrepreneurship in the 19th century.
And that's desperately what we need again on a global scale.
And what can we learn from all of that?
Well, we can learn a lot because our education systems are failing desperately in many ways.
They fail to reach the people they most need to serve.
They often hit their target but miss the point.
Improvement is increasingly difficult to organize; our faith in these systems, incredibly fraught.
And this is just a very simple way of understanding what kind of innovation, what kind of different design we need.
There are two basic types of innovation.
There's sustaining innovation, which will sustain an existing institution or an organization, and disruptive innovation that will break it apart, create some different way of doing it.
There are formal settings -- schools, colleges, hospitals -- in which innovation can take place, and informal settings -- communities, families, social networks.
Almost all our effort goes in this box, sustaining innovation in formal settings, getting a better version of the essentially Bismarckian school system that developed in the 19th century.
And as I said, the trouble with this is that, in the developing world there just aren't teachers to make this model work.
You'd need millions and millions of teachers in China, India, Nigeria and the rest of developing world to meet need.
And in our system, we know that simply doing more of this won't eat into deep educational inequalities, especially in inner cities and former industrial areas.
So that's why we need three more kinds of innovation.
We need more reinvention.
And all around the world now you see more and more schools reinventing themselves.
They're recognizably schools, but they look different.
There are Big Picture schools in the U.S. and Australia.
There are Kunskapsskolan schools in Sweden.
Of 14 of them, only two of them are in schools.
Most of them are in other buildings not designed as schools.
There is an amazing school in Northen Queensland called Jaringan.
And they all have the same kind of features: highly collaborative, very personalized, often pervasive technology, learning that starts from questions and problems and projects, not from knowledge and curriculum.
So we certainly need more of that.
But because so many of the issues in education aren't just in school, they're in family and community, what you also need, definitely, is more on the right hand side.
You need efforts to supplement schools.
The most famous of these is Reggio Emilia in Italy, the family-based learning system to support and encourage people in schools.
The most exciting is the Harlem Children's Zone, which over 10 years, led by Geoffrey Canada, has, through a mixture of schooling and family and community projects, attempted to transform not just education in schools, but the entire culture and aspiration of about 10,000 families in Harlem.
We need more of that completely new and radical thinking.
You can go to places an hour away, less, from this room, just down the road, which need that, which need radicalism of a kind that we haven't imagined.
And finally, you need transformational innovation that could imagine getting learning to people in completely new and different ways.
So we are on the verge, 2015, of an amazing achievement, the schoolification of the world.
Every child up to the age of 15 who wants a place in school will be able to have one in 2015.
It's an amazing thing.
But it is, unlike cars, which have developed so rapidly and orderly, actually the school system is recognizably an inheritance from the 19th century, from a Bismarkian model of German schooling that got taken up by English reformers, and often by religious missionaries, taken up in the United States as a force of social cohesion, and then in Japan and South Korea as they developed.
It's recognizably 19th century in its roots.
And of course it's a huge achievement.
And of course it will bring great things.
It will bring skills and learning and reading.
But it will also lay waste to imagination.
It will lay waste to appetite. It will lay waste to social confidence.
It will stratify society as much as it liberates it.
And we are bequeathing to the developing world school systems that they will now spend a century trying to reform.
That is why we need really radical thinking, and why radical thinking is now more possible and more needed than ever in how we learn.
Thank you. (Applause)
When I was 10 years old, a cousin of mine took me on a tour of his medical school.
And as a special treat, he took me to the pathology lab and took a real human brain out of the jar and placed it in my hands.
And there it was, the seat of human consciousness, the powerhouse of the human body, sitting in my hands.
And that day I knew that when I grew up, I was going to become a brain doctor, scientist, something or the other.
Years later, when I finally grew up, my dream came true.
And it was while I was doing my Ph.D.
on the neurological causes of dyslexia in children that I encountered a startling fact that I'd like to share with you all today.
It is estimated that one in six children, that's one in six children, suffer from some developmental disorder.
This is a disorder that retards mental development in the child and causes permanent mental impairments.
Which means that each and every one of you here today knows at least one child that is suffering from a developmental disorder.
But here's what really perplexed me.
Despite the fact that each and every one of these disorders originates in the brain, most of these disorders are diagnosed solely on the basis of observable behavior.
But diagnosing a brain disorder without actually looking at the brain is analogous to treating a patient with a heart problem based on their physical symptoms, without even doing an ECG or a chest X-ray to look at the heart.
It seemed so intuitive to me.
To diagnose and treat a brain disorder accurately, it would be necessary to look at the brain directly.
Looking at behavior alone can miss a vital piece of the puzzle and provide an incomplete, or even a misleading, picture of the child's problems.
Yet, despite all the advances in medical technology, the diagnosis of brain disorders in one in six children still remained so limited.
And then I came across a team at Harvard University that had taken one such advanced medical technology and finally applied it, instead of in brain research, towards diagnosing brain disorders in children.
Their groundbreaking technology records the EEG, or the electrical activity of the brain, in real time, allowing us to watch the brain as it performs various functions and then detect even the slightest abnormality in any of these functions: vision, attention, language, audition.
A program called Brain Electrical Activity Mapping then triangulates the source of that abnormality in the brain.
And another program called Statistical Probability Mapping then performs mathematical calculations to determine whether any of these abnormalities are clinically significant, allowing us to provide a much more accurate neurological diagnosis of the child's symptoms.
And so I became the head of neurophysiology for the clinical arm of this team, and we're finally able to use this technology towards actually helping children with brain disorders.
And I'm happy to say that I'm now in the process of setting up this technology here in India.
I'd like to tell you about one such child, whose story was also covered by ABC News.
Seven-year-old Justin Senigar came to our clinic with this diagnosis of very severe autism.
Like many autistic children, his mind was locked inside his body.
There were moments when he would actually space out for seconds at a time.
And the doctors told his parents he was never going to be able to communicate or interact socially, and he would probably never have too much language.
When we used this groundbreaking EEG technology to actually look at Justin's brain, the results were startling.
It turned out that Justin was almost certainly not autistic.
He was suffering from brain seizures that were impossible to see with the naked eye, but that were actually causing symptoms that mimicked those of autism.
After Justin was given anti-seizure medication, the change in him was amazing.
Within a period of 60 days, his vocabulary went from two to three words to 300 words.
And his communication and social interaction were improved so dramatically that he was enrolled into a regular school and even became a karate super champ.
Research shows that 50 percent of children, almost 50 percent of children diagnosed with autism are actually suffering from hidden brain seizures.
These are the faces of the children that I have tested with stories just like Justin.
All these children came to our clinic with a diagnosis of autism, attention deficit disorder, mental retardation, language problems.
Instead, our EEG scans revealed very specific problems hidden within their brains that couldn't possibly have been detected by their behavioral assessments.
So these EEG scans enabled us to provide these children with a much more accurate neurological diagnosis and much more targeted treatment.
For too long now, children with developmental disorders have suffered from misdiagnosis while their real problems have gone undetected and left to worsen.
And for too long, these children and their parents have suffered undue frustration and desperation.
But we are now in a new era of neuroscience, one in which we can finally look directly at brain function in real time with no risks and no side effects, non-invasively, and find the true source of so many disabilities in children.
So if I could inspire even a fraction of you in the audience today to share this pioneering diagnostic approach with even one parent whose child is suffering from a developmental disorder, then perhaps one more puzzle in one more brain will be solved.
One more mind will be unlocked.
And one more child who has been misdiagnosed or even undiagnosed by the system will finally realize his or her true potential while there's still time for his or her brain to recover.
And all this by simply watching the child's brainwaves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, these are the Dark Ages.
And the Dark Ages are the time between when you put away the LEGO for the last time as a kid, and you decide as an adult that it is okay to play with a kid's toy.
Started out with my then four-year-old: "Oh, should buy the kid some LEGO.
That stuff's cool."
Walked into the LEGO store.
Bought him this.
It's totally appropriate for a four-year-old.
(Laughter) I think the box says -- let's see here -- "8 to 12" on it.
I turn to my wife and said, "Who are we buying this for?"
She's like, "Oh, us." I'm like, "Okay. All right. That's cool."
Pretty soon it got a little bit out of control.
The dining room looked like this.
You walk there, and it hurts.
So we took a room downstairs in the basement that had been used as sort of an Abu Ghraib annex.
(Laughter) Torture, very funny.
Wow, you guys are great.
And we put down those little floor tiles, and then I went onto eBay and bought 150 pounds of LEGO -- (Laughter) which is insane.
My daughter -- the day we got it, I was tucking her in -- and I said, "Honey, you're my treasure."
And she said, "No, the LEGO is the treasure."
(Laughter) And then she said, "Dad, we're LEGO rich."
I was like, "Yeah.
I suppose we are."
So then once you do that you're like, "Oh, crap. Where am I going to put all this?"
So you go to The Container Store and spend an enormous amount of money, and then you start this crazy sorting process that never -- it's just nuts.
Whatever.
So then you realize there are these conventions.
And you go to one of these conventions, and some dude built the Titanic.
And you're like, "Holy shit!
He had to come in like a truck, a semi, with this thing."
And then someone built this -- this is the Smith Tower in Seattle.
Just beautiful.
And there's a dude selling these aftermarket weapons for LEGO, because LEGO -- the Danish -- no, they're not into guns.
But the Americans? Oh, we'll make some guns for LEGO, no problem.
And at a certain point, you look around, you're like, "Whoa, this is a really nerdy crowd."
And I mean like this is a nerdy crowd, but that's like a couple of levels above furries.
(Laughter) The nerds here, they get laid -- except for the lady with the condoms in her pocket -- and you say to yourself at some point, "Am I part of this group? Like, am I into this?"
And I was just like, "Yeah, I guess I am.
I'm coming out.
I'm kind of into this stuff, and I'm going to stop being embarrassed."
So then you really get into it, and you're like, "Well, the LEGO people in Denmark, they've got all this software to let you build your own virtually."
And so this is like this CAD program where you build it.
And then whatever you design virtually, you click the button and it shows up at your doorstep a week later.
And then some of the designs that people do they actually sell in the store.
The LEGO guys don't give you any royalties, strangely, but some user made this and then it sold.
And it's pretty amazing actually.
Then you notice that if that LEGO-provided CAD program isn't enough, there's an entire open-source, third-party, independent LEGO CAD program that lets you do 3D modeling and 3D rendering and make, in fact, movies out of LEGO, 3D films of which there are thousands on YouTube, and some of them sort of mimicking famous films and some totally original content -- just beautiful -- and people recreating all sorts of things.
I have to take a moment.
I love the guy who's like running away with his clasps, his hooks.
Okay. Anyway.
(Laughter) There's a whole programming language and robotics tool, so if you want to teach someone how to program, kid, adult, whatever it is.
And the guy that made this, he made a slot machine out of LEGO.
And I don't mean he made LEGO that looked like a slot machine; I mean he made a slot machine out of LEGO.
The insides were LEGO.
There's people getting drunk building LEGO, and you've got to finish the thing before you puke.
There's a whole gray market for LEGO, thousands of home-based businesses.
And some people will fund their entire LEGO habit by selling the little guy, but then you have no guys in your ships.
And then, just some examples. This stuff really is sculpture.
This is amazing what you can do.
And don't kid yourself: some architectural details, incredible organic shapes and just, even, nature out of, again, little blocks.
This is my house.
And this is my house.
I was afraid a car was going to come smash it as I was taking a picture for you guys.
Anyway, I'm out of time.
But just very quickly -- we'll just see if I can do this quick.
Because there aren't enough TED logos around here.
(Laughter) Let's see here.
Okay.
Ta-da.
(Applause)
My best friend recently had a baby.
And when I met him, I was in awe of witnessing this tiny, beautiful being enter into our lives.
I also had this realization that he wasn't just entering our lives, he was entering the world -- this crazy world that, especially now, feels so incredibly challenging.
I spend a lot time in my work talking to people about who we are, who we must be and what our healing looks like.
So the first time I held him, I had my pep talk ready.
You know, I wanted him to know that the way we find our strength is through our challenges.
I wanted him to know that we can all do something big when we start small.
I wanted him to know that each of us is more resilient than we could ever imagine.
So here I am holding little Thelonious.
I look down at him, and it hits me: he's a baby.
(Laughter) He's not going to understand a single word I say to him.
So instead, I thought it would probably be a better idea if I went home and wrote.
So, this is for grownups, but it's also for Thelonious, when he's old enough to read it: The world will say to you, "Be a better person."
Do not be afraid to say, "Yes."
Start by being a better listener.
Start by being better at walking down the street.
See people.
Say, "Hello."
Ask how they are doing and listen to what they say.
Start by being a better friend, a better parent, a better child to your parents; a better sibling, a better lover, a better partner.
Start by being a better neighbor.
Meet someone you do not know, and get to know them.
The world will say to you, "What are you going to do?"
Do not be afraid to say, "I know I can't do everything, but I can do something."
Walk into more rooms saying, "I'm here to help."
Become intimate with generosity.
Give what you can give, and do what you can do.
Give dollars, give cents, give your time, give your love, give your heart, give your spirit.
The world will say to you, "We need peace."
Find your peace within, hold it sacred, bring it with you everywhere you go.
Peace cannot be shared or created with others if we cannot first generate it within.
The world will say to you, "They are the enemy."
Love enough to know that just because someone disagrees with you, it does not make them your enemy.
You may not win an argument, you may not change a mind, but if you choose to, you can always achieve the triumph of radical empathy -- an understanding of the heart.
The world will say to you, "We need justice."
Investigate.
Find truth beyond the stories you are told.
Find truth beyond the way things seem.
Ask, "Why?"
Ask, "Is this fair?"
Ask, "How did we get here?"
Do this with compassion.
Do this with forgiveness.
Learn to forgive others.
Start by truly learning how to forgive yourself.
We are all more than our mistakes.
We are all more than who we were yesterday.
We are all deserving of our dignity.
See yourself in others.
Recognize that your justice is my justice, and mine is yours.
There can be no liberation for one of us if the other is not free.
(Applause) The world will say to you, "I am violent."
Respond by saying, "I am not.
Not with my words and not with my actions."
The world will say to you, "We need to heal the planet."
Start by saying, "No, thank you. I don't need a plastic bag."
Recycle, reuse.
Start by picking up one piece of trash on your block.
The world will say to you, "There are too many problems."
Do not be afraid to be a part of the solutions.
Start by discussing the issues.
We cannot overcome what we ignore.
The more we talk about things, the more we see that the issues are connected because we are connected.
The world will say to you, "We need to end racism."
Start by healing it in your own family.
The world will say to you, "How do we speak to bias and bigotry?"
Start by having the first conversation at your own kitchen table.
The world will say to you, "There is so much hate."
Devote yourself to love.
Love yourself so much that you can love others without barriers and without judgment.
When the world asks us big questions that require big answers, we have two options.
One: to feel so overwhelmed or unqualified, we do nothing.
Two: to start with one small act and qualify ourselves.
I am the director of national security, and so are you.
Maybe no one appointed us and there were no senate confirmations, but we can secure a nation.
When you help just one person to be more secure, a nation is more secure.
With just one outstretched hand that says, "Are you OK?
I am here for you," we can transform insecurity into security.
We find ourselves saying to the world, "What should I do?" "What should we do?"
The better question might be: "How am I showing up?"
I ask the world for peace, but do I show up with peace when I see my family and friends?
I ask the world to end hatred, but do I show up with love not only for those I know, but those I don't know?
Do I show up with love for those whose ideas conflict with my own?
I ask the world to end suffering, but do I show up for those who are suffering on my street corner?
We say to the world, "Please change; we need change."
But how do we show up to change our own lives?
How do we show up to change the lives of the people in our communities?
James Baldwin said, "Everything now, we must assume is in our own hands; we have no right to assume otherwise."
This has always been true.
No one nominated Harriet Tubman to her purpose, to her mission, to her courage.
She did not say, "I'm not a congressman or the president of the United States, so how could I possibly participate in the fight to abolish a system as big as slavery?"
She instead spent 10 years making 19 trips, freeing 300 people, one group of people at a time.
Think about the children of those 300 people, the grandchildren, the great-grandchildren and beyond.
Our righteous acts create immeasurable ripples in the endless river of justice.
Whether it's Hurricane Katrina, Harvey, Irma or Maria, people did not say, "There is so much damage. What should I do?"
They got to work on what they could do.
Those with boats got in their boats and started loading in every woman, man and child they came across.
Near and far, people gave their dollars, they gave their cents, they gave their hearts, they gave their spirit.
We spend so much time thinking we don't have the power to change the world.
We forget that the power to change someone's life is always in our hands.
Change-making does not belong to one group of people; it belongs to all of us.
You don't have to wait on anyone to tell you that you are in this.
Begin.
Start by doing what you can with what you've got, where you are and in your own way.
We don't have to be heroes, wear a uniform, call ourselves activists or get elected to participate.
We just have to be brave enough to care.
Now, around the time Thelonious was born, I went to the birthday party of a man named Gene Moretti.
It was his 100th birthday, which means he lived in the United States through the Depression, World War II, the struggle for workers' rights, the achievement of a woman's right to vote, the Civil Rights Movement, a man on the moon, the Vietnam War and the election of the first black president.
I sat with him, and I said, "Gene, you have lived in America for 100 years.
Do you have any advice during these current times?"
He smiled and said to me simply, "Yes.
Be good to as many people as possible."
And as he danced with my mother, who is, by the way, half his age, in a room full of generations of his family and hundreds of people, many of whom traveled thousands of miles to be there to celebrate him, I realized that he had not just given me advice, he had given me the first step that every single one of us is capable of making if we want to create a real, wholehearted impact on the world around us, right now.
"Be good to as many people as possible."
Thank you.
(Applause)
The story starts in Kenya in December of 2007, when there was a disputed presidential election, and in the immediate aftermath of that election, there was an outbreak of ethnic violence.
And there was a lawyer in Nairobi, Ory Okolloh -- who some of you may know from her TEDTalk -- who began blogging about it on her site, Kenyan Pundit.
And shortly after the election and the outbreak of violence, the government suddenly imposed a significant media blackout.
And so weblogs went from being commentary as part of the media landscape to being a critical part of the media landscape in trying to understand where the violence was.
And Okolloh solicited from her commenters more information about what was going on.
The comments began pouring in, and Okolloh would collate them. She would post them.
And she quickly said, "It's too much.
I could do this all day every day and I can't keep up.
There is more information about what's going on in Kenya right now than any one person can manage.
If only there was a way to automate this."
And two programmers who read her blog held their hands up and said, "We could do that," and in 72 hours, they launched Ushahidi.
Ushahidi -- the name means "witness" or "testimony" in Swahili -- is a very simple way of taking reports from the field, whether it's from the web or, critically, via mobile phones and SMS, aggregating it and putting it on a map.
That's all it is, but that's all that's needed because what it does is it takes the tacit information available to the whole population -- everybody knows where the violence is, but no one person knows what everyone knows -- and it takes that tacit information and it aggregates it, and it maps it and it makes it public.
And that, that maneuver called "crisis mapping," was kicked off in Kenya in January of 2008.
And enough people looked at it and found it valuable enough that the programmers who created Ushahidi decided they were going to make it open source and turn it into a platform.
It's since been deployed in Mexico to track electoral fraud.
It's been deployed in Washington D.C. to track snow cleanup.
And it's been used most famously in Haiti in the aftermath of the earthquake.
And when you look at the map now posted on the Ushahidi front page, you can see that the number of deployments in Ushahidi has gone worldwide, all right?
This went from a single idea and a single implementation in East Africa in the beginning of 2008 to a global deployment in less than three years.
Now what Okolloh did would not have been possible without digital technology.
What Okolloh did would not have been possible without human generosity.
And the interesting moment now, the number of environments where the social design challenge relies on both of those things being true.
That is the resource that I'm talking about.
I call it cognitive surplus.
And it represents the ability of the world's population to volunteer and to contribute and collaborate on large, sometimes global, projects.
Cognitive surplus is made up of two things.
The first, obviously, is the world's free time and talents.
The world has over a trillion hours a year of free time to commit to shared projects.
Now, that free time existed in the 20th century, but we didn't get Ushahidi in the 20th century.
That's the second half of cognitive surplus.
The media landscape in the 20th century was very good at helping people consume, and we got, as a result, very good at consuming.
But now that we've been given media tools -- the Internet, mobile phones -- that let us do more than consume, what we're seeing is that people weren't couch potatoes because we liked to be.
We were couch potatoes because that was the only opportunity given to us.
We still like to consume, of course.
But it turns out we also like to create, and we like to share.
And it's those two things together -- ancient human motivation and the modern tools to allow that motivation to be joined up in large-scale efforts -- that are the new design resource.
And using cognitive surplus, we're starting to see truly incredible experiments in scientific, literary, artistic, political efforts.
Designing.
We're also getting, of course, a lot of LOLcats.
LOLcats are cute pictures of cats made cuter with the addition of cute captions.
And they are also part of the abundant media landscape we're getting now.
This is one of the participatory -- one of the participatory models we see coming out of that, along with Ushahidi.
Now I want to stipulate, as the lawyers say, that LOLcats are the stupidest possible creative act.
There are other candidates of course, but LOLcats will do as a general case.
But here's the thing: The stupidest possible creative act is still a creative act.
Someone who has done something like this, however mediocre and throwaway, has tried something, has put something forward in public.
And once they've done it, they can do it again, and they could work on getting it better.
There is a spectrum between mediocre work and good work, and as anybody who's worked as an artist or a creator knows, it's a spectrum you're constantly struggling to get on top of.
The gap is between doing anything and doing nothing.
And someone who makes a LOLcat has already crossed over that gap.
Now it's tempting to want to get the Ushahidis without the LOLcats, right, to get the serious stuff without the throwaway stuff.
But media abundance never works that way.
Freedom to experiment means freedom to experiment with anything.
Even with the sacred printing press, we got erotic novels 150 years before we got scientific journals.
So before I talk about what is, I think, the critical difference between LOLcats and Ushahidi, I want to talk about their shared source.
And that source is design for generosity.
It is one of the curiosities of our historical era that even as cognitive surplus is becoming a resource we can design around, social sciences are also starting to explain how important our intrinsic motivations are to us, how much we do things because we like to do them rather than because our boss told us to do them, or because we're being paid to do them.
This is a graph from a paper by Uri Gneezy and Aldo Rustichini, who set out to test, at the beginning of this decade, what they called "deterrence theory."
And deterrence theory is a very simple theory of human behavior: If you want somebody to do less of something, add a punishment and they'll do less of it.
Simple, straightforward, commonsensical -- also, largely untested.
And so they went and studied 10 daycare centers in Haifa, Israel.
They studied those daycare centers at the time of highest tension, which is pick-up time.
At pick-up time the teachers, who have been with your children all day, would like you to be there at the appointed hour to take your children back.
Meanwhile, the parents -- perhaps a little busy at work, running late, running errands -- want a little slack to pick the kids up late.
So Gneezy and Rustichini said, "How many instances of late pick-ups are there at these 10 daycare centers?"
Now they saw -- and this is what the graph is, these are the number of weeks and these are the number of late arrivals -- that there were between six and 10 instances of late pick-ups on average in these 10 daycare centers.
So they divided the daycare centers into two groups.
The white group there is the control group; they change nothing.
But the group of daycare centers represented by the black line, they said, "We are changing this bargain as of right now.
If you pick your kid up more than 10 minutes late, we're going to add a 10 shekel fine to your bill.
Boom. No ifs, ands or buts."
And the minute they did that, the behavior in those daycare centers changed.
Late pick-ups went up every week for the next four weeks until they topped out at triple the pre-fine average, and then they fluctuated at between double and triple the pre-fine average for the life of the fine.
And you can see immediately what happened, right?
The fine broke the culture of the daycare center.
By adding a fine, what they did was communicate to the parents that their entire debt to the teachers had been discharged with the payment of 10 shekels, and that there was no residue of guilt or social concern that the parents owed the teachers.
And so the parents, quite sensibly, said, "10 shekels to pick my kid up late?
What could be bad?"
(Laughter) The explanation of human behavior that we inherited in the 20th century was that we are all rational, self-maximizing actors, and in that explanation -- the daycare center had no contract -- should have been operating without any constraints.
But that's not right.
They were operating with social constraints rather than contractual ones.
And critically, the social constraints created a culture that was more generous than the contractual constraints did.
So Gneezy and Rustichini run this experiment for a dozen weeks -- run the fine for a dozen weeks -- and then they say, "Okay, that's it. All done; fine."
And then a really interesting thing happens: Nothing changes.
The culture that got broken by the fine stayed broken when the fine was removed.
Not only are economic motivations and intrinsic motivations incompatible, that incompatibility can persist over long periods.
So the trick in designing these kinds of situations is to understand where you're relying on the economic part of the bargain -- as with the parents paying the teachers -- and when you're relying on the social part of the bargain, when you're really designing for generosity.
This brings me back to the LOLcats and to Ushahidi.
This is, I think, the range that matters.
Both of these rely on cognitive surplus.
Both of these design for the assumption that people like to create and we want to share.
Here is the critical difference between these: LOLcats is communal value.
It's value created by the participants for each other.
Communal value on the networks we have is everywhere -- every time you see a large aggregate of shared, publicly available data, whether it's photos on Flickr or videos on Youtube or whatever.
This is good. I like LOLcats as much as the next guy, maybe a little more even, but this is also a largely solved problem.
I have a hard time envisioning a future in which someone is saying, "Where, oh where, can I find a picture of a cute cat?"
Ushahidi, by contrast, is civic value.
It's value created by the participants but enjoyed by society as a whole.
The goals set out by Ushahidi are not just to make life better for the participants, but to make life better for everyone in the society in which Ushahidi is operating.
And that kind of civic value is not just a side effect of opening up to human motivation.
It really is going to be a side effect of what we, collectively, make of these kinds of efforts.
There are a trillion hours a year of participatory value up for grabs.
That will be true year-in and year-out.
The number of people who are going to be able to participate in these kinds of projects is going to grow, and we can see that organizations designed around a culture of generosity can achieve incredible effects without an enormous amount of contractual overhead -- a very different model than our default model for large-scale group action in the 20th century.
What's going to make the difference here is what Dean Kamen said, the inventor and entrepreneur.
Kamen said, "Free cultures get what they celebrate."
We've got a choice before us.
We've got this trillion hours a year.
We can use it to crack each other up, and we're going to do that.
That, we get for free.
But we can also celebrate and support and reward the people trying to use cognitive surplus to create civic value.
And to the degree we're going to do that, to the degree we're able to do that, we'll be able to change society.
Thank you very much.
In the last 50 years, we've been building the suburbs with a lot of unintended consequences.
And I'm going to talk about some of those consequences and just present a whole bunch of really interesting projects that I think give us tremendous reasons to be really optimistic that the big design and development project of the next 50 years is going to be retrofitting suburbia.
So whether it's redeveloping dying malls or re-inhabiting dead big-box stores or reconstructing wetlands out of parking lots, I think the fact is the growing number of empty and under-performing, especially retail, sites throughout suburbia gives us actually a tremendous opportunity to take our least-sustainable landscapes right now and convert them into more sustainable places.
And in the process, what that allows us to do is to redirect a lot more of our growth back into existing communities that could use a boost, and have the infrastructure in place, instead of continuing to tear down trees and to tear up the green space out at the edges.
So why is this important?
I think there are any number of reasons, and I'm just going to not get into detail but mention a few.
Just from the perspective of climate change, the average urban dweller in the U.S.
has about one-third the carbon footprint of the average suburban dweller, mostly because suburbanites drive a lot more, and living in detached buildings, you have that much more exterior surface to leak energy out of.
So strictly from a climate change perspective, the cities are already relatively green.
The big opportunity to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is actually in urbanizing the suburbs.
All that driving that we've been doing out in the suburbs, we have doubled the amount of miles we drive.
It's increased our dependence on foreign oil despite the gains in fuel efficiency.
We're just driving so much more; we haven't been able to keep up technologically.
Public health is another reason to consider retrofitting.
Researchers at the CDC and other places have increasingly been linking suburban development patterns with sedentary lifestyles.
And those have been linked then with the rather alarming, growing rates of obesity, shown in these maps here, and that obesity has also been triggering great increases in heart disease and diabetes to the point where a child born today has a one-in-three chance of developing diabetes.
And that rate has been escalating at the same rate as children not walking to school anymore, again, because of our development patterns.
And then there's finally -- there's the affordability question.
I mean, how affordable is it to continue to live in suburbia with rising gas prices?
Suburban expansion to cheap land, for the last 50 years -- you know the cheap land out on the edge -- has helped generations of families enjoy the American dream.
But increasingly, the savings promised by drive-till-you-qualify affordability -- which is basically our model -- those savings are wiped out when you consider the transportation costs.
For instance, here in Atlanta, about half of households make between $20,000 and $50,000 a year, and they are spending 29 percent of their income on housing and 32 percent on transportation.
I mean, that's 2005 figures.
That's before we got up to the four bucks a gallon.
You know, none of us really tend to do the math on our transportation costs, and they're not going down any time soon.
Whether you love suburbia's leafy privacy or you hate its soulless commercial strips, there are reasons why it's important to retrofit.
But is it practical?
I think it is.
June Williamson and I have been researching this topic for over a decade, and we've found over 80 varied projects.
But that they're really all market driven, and what's driving the market in particular -- number one -- is major demographic shifts.
We all tend to think of suburbia as this very family-focused place, but that's really not the case anymore.
Since 2000, already two-thirds of households in suburbia did not have kids in them.
We just haven't caught up with the actual realities of this.
The reasons for this have a lot to with the dominance of the two big demographic groups right now: the Baby Boomers retiring -- and then there's a gap, Generation X, which is a small generation.
They're still having kids -- but Generation Y hasn't even started hitting child-rearing age.
They're the other big generation.
So as a result of that, demographers predict that through 2025, 75 to 85 percent of new households will not have kids in them.
And the market research, consumer research, asking the Boomers and Gen Y what it is they would like, what they would like to live in, tells us there is going to be a huge demand -- and we're already seeing it -- for more urban lifestyles within suburbia.
That basically, the Boomers want to be able to age in place, and Gen Y would like to live an urban lifestyle, but most of their jobs will continue to be out in suburbia.
The other big dynamic of change is the sheer performance of underperforming asphalt.
Now I keep thinking this would be a great name for an indie rock band, but developers generally use it to refer to underused parking lots -- and suburbia is full of them.
When the postwar suburbs were first built out on the cheap land away from downtown, it made sense to just build surface parking lots.
But those sites have now been leapfrogged and leapfrogged again, as we've just continued to sprawl, and they now have a relatively central location.
It no longer just makes sense.
That land is more valuable than just surface parking lots.
It now makes sense to go back in, build a deck and build up on those sites.
So what do you do with a dead mall, dead office park?
It turns out, all sorts of things.
In a slow economy like ours, re-inhabitation is one of the more popular strategies.
So this happens to be a dead mall in St. Louis that's been re-inhabited as art-space.
It's now home to artist studios, theater groups, dance troupes.
It's not pulling in as much tax revenue as it once was, but it's serving its community.
It's keeping the lights on.
It's becoming, I think, a really great institution.
Other malls have been re-inhabited as nursing homes, as universities, and as all variety of office space.
We also found a lot of examples of dead big-box stores that have been converted into all sorts of community-serving uses as well -- lots of schools, lots of churches and lots of libraries like this one.
This was a little grocery store, a Food Lion grocery store, that is now a public library.
In addition to, I think, doing a beautiful adaptive reuse, they tore up some of the parking spaces, put in bioswales to collect and clean the runoff, put in a lot more sidewalks to connect to the neighborhoods.
And they've made this, what was just a store along a commercial strip, into a community gathering space.
This one is a little L-shaped strip shopping center in Phoenix, Arizona.
Really all they did was they gave it a fresh coat of bright paint, a gourmet grocery, and they put up a restaurant in the old post office.
Never underestimate the power of food to turn a place around and make it a destination.
It's been so successful, they've now taken over the strip across the street.
The real estate ads in the neighborhood all very proudly proclaim, "Walking distance to Le Grande Orange," because it provided its neighborhood with what sociologists like to call "a third place."
If home is the first place and work is the second place, the third place is where you go to hang out and build community.
And especially as suburbia is becoming less centered on the family, the family households, there's a real hunger for more third places.
So the most dramatic retrofits are really those in the next category, the next strategy: redevelopment.
Now, during the boom, there were several really dramatic redevelopment projects where the original building was scraped to the ground and then the whole site was rebuilt at significantly greater density, a sort of compact, walkable urban neighborhoods.
But some of them have been much more incremental.
This is Mashpee Commons, the oldest retrofit that we've found.
And it's just incrementally, over the last 20 years, built urbanism on top of its parking lots.
So the black and white photo shows the simple 60's strip shopping center.
And then the maps above that show its gradual transformation into a compact, mixed-use New England village, and it has plans now that have been approved for it to connect to new residential neighborhoods across the arterials and over to the other side.
So, you know, sometimes it's incremental.
Sometimes, it's all at once.
This is another infill project on the parking lots, this one of an office park outside of Washington D.C.
When Metrorail expanded transit into the suburbs and opened a station nearby to this site, the owners decided to build a new parking deck and then insert on top of their surface lots a new Main Street, several apartments and condo buildings, while keeping the existing office buildings.
Here is the site in 1940: It was just a little farm in the village of Hyattsville.
By 1980, it had been subdivided into a big mall on one side and the office park on the other and then some buffer sites for a library and a church to the far right.
Today, the transit, the Main Street and the new housing have all been built.
Eventually, I expect that the streets will probably extend through a redevelopment of the mall.
Plans have already been announced for a lot of those garden apartments above the mall to be redeveloped.
Transit is a big driver of retrofits.
So here's what it looks like.
You can sort of see the funky new condo buildings in between the office buildings and the public space and the new Main Street.
This one is one of my favorites, Belmar.
I think they really built an attractive place here and have just employed all-green construction.
There's massive P.V. arrays on the roofs as well as wind turbines.
This was a very large mall on a hundred-acre superblock.
It's now 22 walkable urban blocks with public streets, two public parks, eight bus lines and a range of housing types, and so it's really given Lakewood, Colorado the downtown that this particular suburb never had.
Here was the mall in its heyday.
They had their prom in the mall. They loved their mall.
So here's the site in 1975 with the mall.
By 1995, the mall has died.
The department store has been kept -- and we found this was true in many cases.
The department stores are multistory; they're better built.
They're easy to be re-adapted.
But the one story stuff ...
that's really history.
So here it is at projected build-out.
This project, I think, has great connectivity to the existing neighborhoods.
It's providing 1,500 households with the option of a more urban lifestyle.
It's about two-thirds built out right now.
Here's what the new Main Street looks like.
It's very successful, and it's helped to prompt -- eight of the 13 regional malls in Denver have now, or have announced plans to be, retrofitted.
But it's important to note that all of this retrofitting is not occurring -- just bulldozers are coming and just plowing down the whole city.
No, it's pockets of walkability on the sites of under-performing properties.
And so it's giving people more choices, but it's not taking away choices.
But it's also not really enough to just create pockets of walkability.
You want to also try to get more systemic transformation.
We need to also retrofit the corridors themselves.
So this is one that has been retrofitted in California.
They took the commercial strip shown on the black-and-white images below, and they built a boulevard that has become the Main Street for their town.
And it's transformed from being an ugly, unsafe, undesirable address, to becoming a beautiful, attractive, dignified sort of good address.
I mean now we're hoping we start to see it; they've already built City Hall, attracted two hotels.
I could imagine beautiful housing going up along there without tearing down another tree.
So there's a lot of great things, but I'd love to see more corridors getting retrofitting.
But densification is not going to work everywhere.
Sometimes re-greening is really the better answer.
There's a lot to learn from successful landbanking programs in cities like Flint, Michigan.
There's also a burgeoning suburban farming movement -- sort of victory gardens meets the Internet.
But perhaps one of the most important re-greening aspects is the opportunity to restore the local ecology, as in this example outside of Minneapolis.
When the shopping center died, the city restored the site's original wetlands, creating lakefront property, which then attracted private investment, the first private investment to this very low-income neighborhood in over 40 years.
So they've managed to both restore the local ecology and the local economy at the same time.
This is another re-greening example.
It also makes sense in very strong markets.
This one in Seattle is on the site of a mall parking lot adjacent to a new transit stop.
And the wavy line is a path alongside a creek that has now been daylit.
The creek had been culverted under the parking lot.
But daylighting our creeks really improves their water quality and contributions to habitat.
So I've shown you some of the first generation of retrofits.
What's next?
I think we have three challenges for the future.
The first is to plan retrofitting much more systemically at the metropolitan scale.
We need to be able to target which areas really should be re-greened.
Where should we be redeveloping?
And where should we be encouraging re-inhabitation?
These slides just show two images from a larger project that looked at trying to do that for Atlanta.
I led a team that was asked to imagine Atlanta 100 years from now.
And we chose to try to reverse sprawl through three simple moves -- expensive, but simple.
One, in a hundred years, transit on all major rail and road corridors.
Two, in a hundred years, thousand foot buffers on all stream corridors.
It's a little extreme, but we've got a little water problem.
In a hundred years, subdivisions that simply end up too close to water or too far from transit won't be viable.
And so we've created the eco-acre transfer-to-transfer development rights to the transit corridors and allow the re-greening of those former subdivisions for food and energy production.
So the second challenge is to improve the architectural design quality of the retrofits.
And I close with this image of democracy in action: This is a protest that's happening on a retrofit in Silver Spring, Maryland on an Astroturf town green.
Now, retrofits are often accused of being examples of faux downtowns and instant urbanism, and not without reason; you don't get much more phony than an Astroturf town green.
I have to say, these are very hybrid places.
They are new but trying to look old.
They have urban streetscapes, but suburban parking ratios.
Their populations are more diverse than typical suburbia, but they're less diverse than cities.
And they are public places, but that are managed by private companies.
And just the surface appearance are often -- like the Astroturf here -- they make me wince.
So, you know, I mean I'm glad that the urbanism is doing its job.
The fact that a protest is happening really does mean that the layout of the blocks, the streets and blocks, the putting in of public space, compromised as it may be, is still a really great thing.
But we've got to get the architecture better.
The final challenge is for all of you.
I want you to join the protest and start demanding more sustainable suburban places -- more sustainable places, period.
But culturally, we tend to think that downtowns should be dynamic, and we expect that.
But we seem to have an expectation that the suburbs should forever remain frozen in whatever adolescent form they were first given birth to.
It's time to let them grow up, so I want you to all support the zoning changes, the road diets, the infrastructure improvements and the retrofits that are coming soon to a neighborhood near you.
Thank you.
It can be a very complicated thing, the ocean.
And it can be a very complicated thing, what human health is.
And bringing those two together might seem a very daunting task, but what I'm going to try to say is that even in that complexity, there's some simple themes that I think, if we understand, we can really move forward.
And those simple themes aren't really themes about the complex science of what's going on, but things that we all pretty well know.
And I'm going to start with this one: If momma ain't happy, ain't nobody happy.
We know that, right? We've experienced that.
And if we just take that and we build from there, then we can go to the next step, which is that if the ocean ain't happy, ain't nobody happy.
That's the theme of my talk.
And we're making the ocean pretty unhappy in a lot of different ways.
This is a shot of Cannery Row in 1932.
Cannery Row, at the time, had the biggest industrial canning operation on the west coast.
We piled enormous amounts of pollution into the air and into the water.
Rolf Bolin, who was a professor at the Hopkin's Marine Station where I work, wrote in the 1940s that "The fumes from the scum floating on the inlets of the bay were so bad they turned lead-based paints black."
People working in these canneries could barely stay there all day because of the smell, but you know what they came out saying?
They say, "You know what you smell?
You smell money."
That pollution was money to that community, and those people dealt with the pollution and absorbed it into their skin and into their bodies because they needed the money.
We made the ocean unhappy; we made people very unhappy, and we made them unhealthy.
The connection between ocean health and human health is actually based upon another couple simple adages, and I want to call that "pinch a minnow, hurt a whale."
The pyramid of ocean life ...
Now, when an ecologist looks at the ocean -- I have to tell you -- we look at the ocean in a very different way, and we see different things than when a regular person looks at the ocean because when an ecologist looks at the ocean, we see all those interconnections.
We see the base of the food chain, the plankton, the small things, and we see how those animals are food to animals in the middle of the pyramid, and on so up this diagram.
And that flow, that flow of life, from the very base up to the very top, is the flow that ecologists see.
And that's what we're trying to preserve when we say, "Save the ocean. Heal the ocean."
It's that pyramid.
Now why does that matter for human health?
Because when we jam things in the bottom of that pyramid that shouldn't be there, some very frightening things happen.
Pollutants, some pollutants have been created by us: molecules like PCBs that can't be broken down by our bodies.
And they go in the base of that pyramid, and they drift up; they're passed up that way, on to predators and on to the top predators, and in so doing, they accumulate.
Now, to bring that home, I thought I'd invent a little game.
We don't really have to play it; we can just think about it here.
It's the Styrofoam and chocolate game.
Imagine that when we got on this boat, we were all given two Styrofoam peanuts.
Can't do much with them: Put them in your pocket.
Suppose the rules are: every time you offer somebody a drink, you give them the drink, and you give them your Styrofoam peanuts too.
What'll happen is that the Styrofoam peanuts will start moving through our society here, and they will accumulate in the drunkest, stingiest people.
(Laughter) There's no mechanism in this game for them to go anywhere but into a bigger and bigger pile of indigestible Styrofoam peanuts.
And that's exactly what happens with PDBs in this food pyramid: They accumulate into the top of it.
Now suppose, instead of Styrofoam peanuts, we take these lovely little chocolates that we get and we had those instead.
Well, some of us would be eating those chocolates instead of passing them around, and instead of accumulating, they will just pass into our group here and not accumulate in any one group because they're absorbed by us.
And that's the difference between a PCB and, say, something natural like an omega-3, something we want out of the marine food chain.
PCBs accumulate.
We have great examples of that, unfortunately.
PCBs accumulate in dolphins in Sarasota Bay, in Texas, in North Carolina.
They get into the food chain.
The dolphins eat the fish that have PCBs from the plankton, and those PCBs, being fat-soluble, accumulate in these dolphins.
Now, a dolphin, mother dolphin, any dolphin -- there's only one way that a PCB can get out of a dolphin.
And what's that?
In mother's milk.
Here's a diagram of the PCB load of dolphins in Sarasota Bay.
Adult males: a huge load.
Juveniles: a huge load.
Females after their first calf is already weaned: a lower load.
Those females, they're not trying to.
Those females are passing the PCBs in the fat of their own mother's milk into their offspring, and their offspring don't survive.
The death rate in these dolphins, for the first calf born of every female dolphin, is 60 to 80 percent.
These mothers pump their first offspring full of this pollutant, and most of them die.
Now, the mother then can go and reproduce, but what a terrible price to pay for the accumulation of this pollutant in these animals -- the death of the first-born calf.
There's another top predator in the ocean, it turns out.
That top predator, of course, is us.
And we also are eating meat that comes from some of these same places.
This is whale meat that I photographed in a grocery store in Tokyo -- or is it?
In fact, what we did a few years ago was learn how to smuggle a molecular biology lab into Tokyo and use it to genetically test the DNA out of whale meat samples and identify what they really were.
And some of those whale meat samples were whale meat.
Some of them were illegal whale meat, by the way.
That's another story.
But some of them were not whale meat at all.
Even though they were labeled whale meat, they were dolphin meat.
Some of them were dolphin liver. Some of them were dolphin blubber.
And those dolphin parts had a huge load of PCBs, dioxins and heavy metals.
And that huge load was passing into the people that ate this meat.
It turns out that a lot of dolphins are being sold as meat in the whale meat market around the world.
That's a tragedy for those populations, but it's also a tragedy for the people eating them because they don't know that that's toxic meat.
We had these data a few years ago.
I remember sitting at my desk being about the only person in the world who knew that whale meat being sold in these markets was really dolphin meat, and it was toxic.
It had two-to-three-to-400 times the toxic loads ever allowed by the EPA.
And I remember there sitting at my desk thinking, "Well, I know this. This is a great scientific discovery," but it was so awful.
And for the very first time in my scientific career, I broke scientific protocol, which is that you take the data and publish them in scientific journals and then begin to talk about them.
We sent a very polite letter to the Minister of Health in Japan and simply pointed out that this is an intolerable situation, not for us, but for the people of Japan because mothers who may be breastfeeding, who may have young children, would be buying something that they thought was healthy, but it was really toxic.
That led to a whole series of other campaigns in Japan, and I'm really proud to say that at this point, it's very difficult to buy anything in Japan that's labeled incorrectly, even though they're still selling whale meat, which I believe they shouldn't.
But at least it's labeled correctly, and you're no longer going to be buying toxic dolphin meat instead.
It isn't just there that this happens, but in a natural diet of some communities in the Canadian arctic and in the United States and in the European arctic, a natural diet of seals and whales leads to an accumulation of PCBs that have gathered up from all parts of the world and ended up in these women.
These women have toxic breast milk.
They cannot feed their offspring, their children, their breast milk because of the accumulation of these toxins in their food chain, in their part of the world's ocean pyramid.
That means their immune systems are compromised.
It means that their children's development can be compromised.
And the world's attention on this over the last decade has reduced the problem for these women, not by changing the pyramid, but by changing what they particularly eat out of it.
We've taken them out of their natural pyramid in order to solve this problem.
That's a good thing for this particular acute problem, but it does nothing to solve the pyramid problem.
There's other ways of breaking the pyramid.
The pyramid, if we jam things in the bottom, can get backed up like a sewer line that's clogged.
And if we jam nutrients, sewage, fertilizer in the base of that food pyramid, it can back up all through it.
We end up with things we've heard about before: red tides, for example, which are blooms of toxic algae floating through the oceans causing neurological damage.
We can also see blooms of bacteria, blooms of viruses in the ocean.
These are two shots of a red tide coming on shore here and a bacteria in the genus vibrio, which includes the genus that has cholera in it.
How many people have seen a "beach closed" sign?
Why does that happen?
It happens because we have jammed so much into the base of the natural ocean pyramid that these bacteria clog it up and overfill onto our beaches.
Often what jams us up is sewage.
Now how many of you have ever gone to a state park or a national park where you had a big sign at the front saying, "Closed because human sewage is so far over this park that you can't use it"?
Not very often. We wouldn't tolerate that.
We wouldn't tolerate our parks being swamped by human sewage, but beaches are closed a lot in our country.
They're closed more and more and more all around the world for the same reason, and I believe we shouldn't tolerate that either.
It's not just a question of cleanliness; it's also a question of how those organisms then turn into human disease.
These vibrios, these bacteria, can actually infect people.
They can go into your skin and create skin infections.
This is a graph from NOAA's ocean and human health initiative, showing the rise of the infections by vibrio in people over the last few years.
Surfers, for example, know this incredibly.
And if you can see on some surfing sites, in fact, not only do you see what the waves are like or what the weather's like, but on some surf rider sites, you see a little flashing poo alert.
That means that the beach might have great waves, but it's a dangerous place for surfers to be because they can carry with them, even after a great day of surfing, this legacy of an infection that might take a very long time to solve.
Some of these infections are actually carrying antibiotic resistance genes now, and that makes them even more difficult.
These same infections create harmful algal blooms.
Those blooms are generating other kinds of chemicals.
This is just a simple list of some of the types of poisons that come out of these harmful algal blooms: shellfish poisoning,fish ciguatera, diarrheic shellfish poisoning -- you don't want to know about that -- neurotoxic shellfish poisoning, paralytic shellfish poisoning.
These are things that are getting into our food chain because of these blooms.
Rita Calwell very famously traced a very interesting story of cholera into human communities, brought there, not by a normal human vector, but by a marine vector, this copepod.
Copepods are small crustaceans.
They're a tiny fraction of an inch long, and they can carry on their little legs some of the cholera bacteria that then leads to human disease.
That has sparked cholera epidemics in ports along the world and has led to increased concentration on trying to make sure shipping doesn't move these vectors of cholera around the world.
So what do you do?
We have major problems in disrupted ecosystem flow that the pyramid may not be working so well, that the flow from the base up into it is being blocked and clogged.
What do you do when you have this sort of disrupted flow?
Well, there's a bunch of things you could do.
You could call Joe the Plumber, for example.
And he could come in and fix the flow.
But in fact, if you look around the world, not only are there hope spots for where we may be able to fix problems, there have been places where problems have been fixed, where people have come to grips with these issues and begun to turn them around.
Monterey is one of those.
I started out showing how much we had distressed the Monterey Bay ecosystem with pollution and the canning industry and all of the attendant problems.
In 1932, that's the picture.
In 2009, the picture is dramatically different.
The canneries are gone. The pollution has abated.
But there's a greater sense here that what the individual communities need is working ecosystems.
They need a functioning pyramid from the base all the way to the top.
And that pyramid in Monterey, right now, because of the efforts of a lot of different people, is functioning better than it's ever functioned for the last 150 years.
It didn't happen accidentally.
It happened because many people put their time and effort and their pioneering spirit into this.
On the left there, Julia Platt, the mayor of my little hometown in Pacific Grove.
At 74 years old, became mayor because something had to be done to protect the ocean.
In 1931, she produced California's first community-based marine protected area, right next to the biggest polluting cannery, because Julia knew that when the canneries eventually were gone, the ocean needed a place to grow from, that the ocean needed a place to spark a seed, and she wanted to provide that seed.
Other people, like David Packard and Julie Packard, who were instrumental in producing the Monterey Bay aquarium to lock into people's notion that the ocean and the health of the ocean ecosystem were just as important to the economy of this area as eating the ecosystem would be.
That change in thinking has led to a dramatic shift, not only in the fortunes of Monterey Bay, but other places around the world.
Well, I want to leave you with the thought that what we're really trying to do here is protect this ocean pyramid, and that ocean pyramid connects to our own pyramid of life.
It's an ocean planet, and we think of ourselves as a terrestrial species, but the pyramid of life in the ocean and our own lives on land are intricately connected.
And it's only through having the ocean being healthy that we can remain healthy ourselves.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
As you pointed out, every time you come here, you learn something.
This morning, the world's experts from I guess three or four different companies on building seats, I think concluded that ultimately, the solution is, people shouldn't sit down.
I could have told them that.
(Laughter) Yesterday, the automotive guys gave us some new insights.
They pointed out that, I believe it was between 30 and 50 years from today, they will be steering cars by wire, without all that mechanical stuff.
(Laughter) That's reassuring.
(Applause) They then pointed out that there'd be, sort of, the other controls by wire, to get rid of all that mechanical stuff.
That's pretty good, but why not get rid of the wires?
Then you don't need anything to control the car, except thinking about it.
I would love to talk about the technology, and sometime, in what's past the 15 minutes, I'll be happy to talk to all the techno-geeks around here about what's in here.
But if I had one thing to say about this, before we get to first, it would be that from the time we started building this, the big idea wasn't the technology.
It really was a big idea in technology when we started applying it in the iBOT for the disabled community.
The big idea here is, I think, a new piece of a solution to a fairly big problem in transportation.
And maybe to put that in perspective: there's so much data on this, I'll be happy to give it to you in different forms.
You never know what strikes the fancy of whom, but everybody is perfectly willing to believe the car changed the world.
And Henry Ford, just about 100 years ago, started cranking out Model Ts.
What I don't think most people think about is the context of how technology is applied.
For instance, in that time, 91 percent of America lived either on farms or in small towns.
So, the car -- the horseless carriage that replaced the horse and carriage -- was a big deal; it went twice as fast as a horse and carriage.
It was half as long.
And it was an environmental improvement, because, for instance, in 1903 they outlawed horses and buggies in downtown Manhattan, because you can imagine what the roads look like when you have a million horses, and a million of them urinating and doing other things, and the typhoid and other problems created were almost unimaginable.
So the car was the clean environmental alternative to a horse and buggy.
It also was a way for people to get from their farm to a farm, or their farm to a town, or from a town to a city.
It all made sense, with 91 percent of the people living there.
By the 1950s, we started connecting all the towns together with what a lot of people claim is the eighth wonder of the world, the highway system.
And it is certainly a wonder.
And by the way, as I take shots at old technologies, I want to assure everybody, and particularly the automotive industry -- who's been very supportive of us -- that I don't think this in any way competes with airplanes, or cars.
But think about where the world is today.
50 percent of the global population now lives in cities.
That's 3.2 billion people.
We've solved all the transportation problems that have changed the world to get it to where we are today.
500 years ago, sailing ships started getting reliable enough; we found a new continent.
150 years ago, locomotives got efficient enough, steam power, that we turned the continent into a country.
Over the last hundred years, we started building cars, and then over the 50 years we've connected every city to every other city in an extraordinarily efficient way, and we have a very high standard of living as a consequence of that.
But during that entire process, more and more people have been born, and more and more people are moving to cities.
China alone is going to move four to six hundred million people into cities in the next decade and a half.
And so, nobody, I think, would argue that airplanes, in the last 50 years, have turned the continent and the country now into a neighborhood.
And if you just look at how technology has been applied, we've solved all the long-range, high-speed, high-volume, large-weight problems of moving things around.
Nobody would want to give them up.
And I certainly wouldn't want to give up my airplane, or my helicopter, or my Humvee, or my Porsche.
I love them all. I don't keep any of them in my living room.
The fact is, the last mile is the problem, and half the world now lives in dense cities.
And people spend, depending on who they are, between 90 and 95 percent of their energy getting around on foot.
I think there's -- I don't know what data would impress you, but how about, 43 percent of the refined fuel produced in the world is consumed by cars in metropolitan areas in the United States.
Three million people die every year in cities due to bad air, and almost all particulate pollution on this planet is produced by transportation devices, particularly sitting in cities.
And again, I say that not to attack any industry, I think -- I really do -- I love my airplane, and cars on highways moving 60 miles an hour are extraordinarily efficient, both from an engineering point of view, an energy consumption point of view, and a utility point of view.
And we all love our cars, and I do.
The problem is, you get into the city and you want to go four blocks, it's neither fun nor efficient nor productive.
It's not sustainable.
If -- in China, in the year 1998, 417 million people used bicycles; 1.7 million people used cars.
If five percent of that population became, quote, middle class, and wanted to go the way we've gone in the last hundred years at the same time that 50 percent of their population are moving into cities of the size and density of Manhattan, every six weeks -- it isn't sustainable environmentally; it isn't sustainable economically -- there just ain't enough oil -- and it's not sustainable politically.
I mean, what are we fighting over right now?
We can make it complicated, but what's the world fighting over right now?
So it seemed to me that somebody had to work on that last mile, and it was dumb luck. We were working on iBOTs, but once we made this, we instantly decided it could be a great alternative to jet skis. You don't need the water.
Or snowmobiles. You don't need the snow.
Or skiing. It's just fun, and people love to move around doing fun things.
And every one of those industries, by the way -- just golf carts alone is a multi-billion-dollar industry.
But rather than go license this off, which is what we normally do, it seemed to me that if we put all our effort not into the technology, but into an understanding of a world that's solved all its other problems, but has somehow come to accept that cities -- which, right back from ancient Greece on, were meant to walk around, cities that were architected and built for people -- now have a footprint that, while we've solved every other transportation problem -- and it's like Moore's law.
I mean, look at the time it took to cross a continent in a Conestoga wagon, then on a railroad, then an airplane.
Every other form of transportation's been improved.
In 5,000 years, we've gone backwards in getting around cities.
They've gotten bigger; they're spread out.
The most expensive real estate on this planet in every city -- Wilshire Boulevard, or Fifth Avenue, or Tokyo, or Paris -- the most expensive real estate is their downtowns.
65 percent of the landmass of our cities are parked cars.
The 20 largest cities in the world.
So you wonder, what if cities could give to their pedestrians what we take for granted as we now go between cities?
What if you could make them fun, attractive, clean, environmentally friendly?
What if it would make it a little bit more palatable to have access via this, as that last link to mass transit, to get out to your cars so we can all live in the suburbs and use our cars the way we want, and then have our cities energized again?
We thought it would be really neat to do that, and one of the problems we really were worried about is: how do we get legal on the sidewalk?
Because technically I've got motors; I've got wheels -- I'm a motor vehicle.
I don't look like a motor vehicle.
I have the same footprint as a pedestrian; I have the same unique capability to deal with other pedestrians in a crowded space.
I took this down to Ground Zero, and knocked my way through crowds for an hour.
I'm a pedestrian. But the law typically lags technology by a generation or two, and if we get told we don't belong on the sidewalk, we have two choices.
We're a recreational vehicle that doesn't really matter, and I don't spend my time doing that kind of stuff.
Or maybe we should be out in the street in front of a Greyhound bus or a vehicle.
We've been so concerned about that, we went to the Postmaster General of the United States, as the first person we ever showed on the outside, and said, "Put your people on it. Everybody trusts their postman.
And they belong on the sidewalks, and they'll use it seriously."
He agreed. We went to a number of police departments that want their police officers back in the neighborhood on the beat, carrying 70 pounds of stuff. They love it.
And I can't believe a policeman is going to give themselves a ticket.
(Laughter) So we've been working really, really hard, but we knew that the technology would not be as hard to develop as an attitude about what's important, and how to apply the technology.
We went out and we found some visionary people with enough money to let us design and build these things, and in hopefully enough time to get them accepted.
So, I'm happy, really, I am happy to talk about this technology as much as you want.
And yes, it's really fun, and yes, you should all go out and try it.
But if I could ask you to do one thing, it's not to think about it as a piece of technology, but just imagine that, although we all understand somehow that it's reasonable that we use our 4,000-pound machine, which can go 60 miles an hour, that can bring you everywhere you want to go, and somehow it's also what we used for the last mile, and it's broken, and it doesn't work.
One of the more exciting things that occurred to us about why it might get accepted, happened out here in California.
A few weeks ago, after we launched it, we were here with a news crew on Venice Beach, zipping up and back, and he's marveling at the technology, and meanwhile bicycles are zipping by, and skateboarders are zipping by, and a little old lady -- I mean, if you looked in the dictionary, a little old lady -- came by me -- and now that I'm on this, I'm the height of a normal adult now -- and she just stops, and the camera is there, and she looks up at me and says, "Can I try that?"
And what was I -- you know, how are you going to say anything?
And so I said, "Sure."
So I get off, and she gets on, and with a little bit of the usual, ah, then she turns around, and she goes about 20 feet, and she turns back around, and she's all smiles.
And she comes back to me and she stops, and she says, "Finally, they made something for us."
And the camera is looking down at her.
I'm thinking, "Wow, that was great -- (Laughter) -- please lady, don't say another word."
(Laughter) And the camera is down at her, and this guy has to put the microphone in her face, said, "What do you mean by that?"
And I figured, "It's all over now," and she looks up and she says, "Well," she's still watching these guys go; she says, "I can't ride a bike," no, she says, "I can't use a skateboard, and I've never used roller blades," she knew them by name; she says, "And it's been 50 years since I rode a bicycle."
Then she looks up, she's looking up, and she says, "And I'm 81 years old, and I don't drive a car anymore.
I still have to get to the store, and I can't carry a lot of things."
And it suddenly occurred to me, that among my many fears, were not just that the bureaucracy and the regulators and the legislators might not get it -- it was that, fundamentally, you believe there's pressure among the people not to invade the most precious little bit of space left, the sidewalks in these cities.
When you look at the 36 inches of legal requirement for sidewalk, then the eight foot for the parked car, then the three lanes, and then the other eight feet -- it's -- that little piece is all that's there.
But she looks up and says this, and it occurs to me, well, kids aren't going to mind these things, and they don't vote, and business people and then young adults aren't going to mind these things -- they're pretty cool -- so I guess subliminally I was worried that it's the older population that's going to worry.
So, having seen this, and having worried about it for eight years, the first thing I do is pick up my phone and ask our marketing and regulatory guys, call AARP, get an appointment right away.
We've got to show them this thing.
And they took it to Washington; they showed them; and they're going to be involved now, watching how these things get absorbed in a number of cities, like Atlanta, where we're doing trials to see if it really can, in fact, help re-energize their downtown.
(Applause) The bottom line is, whether you believe the United Nations, or any of the other think tanks -- in the next 20 years, all human population growth on this planet will be in cities.
In Asia alone, it will be over a billion people.
They learned to start with cell phones.
They didn't have to take the 100-year trip we took.
They start at the top of the technology food chain.
We've got to start building cities and human environments where a 150-pound person can go a couple of miles in a dense, rich, green-space environment, without being in a 4,000-pound machine to do it.
Cars were not meant for parallel parking; they're wonderful machines to go between cities, but just think about it: we've solved all the long-range, high-speed problems.
The Greeks went from the theater of Dionysus to the Parthenon in their sandals.
You do it in your sneakers.
Not much has changed.
If this thing goes only three times as fast as walking -- three times -- a 30-minute walk becomes 10 minutes.
Your choice, when living in a city, if it's now 10 minutes -- because at 30 minutes you want an alternative, whether it's a bus, a train -- we've got to build an infrastructure -- a light rail -- or you're going to keep parking those cars.
But if you could put a pin in most cities, and imagine how far you could, if you had the time, walk in one half-hour, it's the city.
If you could make it fun, and make it eight or 10 minutes, you can't find your car, un-park your car, move your car, re-park your car and go somewhere; you can't get to a cab or a subway.
We could change the way people allocate their resources, the way this planet uses its energy, make it more fun.
And we're hoping to some extent history will say we were right.
That's Segway. This is a Stirling cycle engine; this had been confused by a lot of things we're doing.
This little beast, right now, is producing a few hundred watts of electricity.
Yes, it could be attached to this, and yes, on a kilogram of propane, you could drive from New York to Boston if you so choose.
Perhaps more interesting about this little engine is it'll burn any fuel, because some of you might be skeptical about the capability of this to have an impact, where most of the world you can't simply plug into your 120-volt outlet.
We've been working on this, actually, as an alternative energy source, starting way back with Johnson &amp; Johnson, to run an iBOT, because the best batteries you could get -- 10 watt-hours per kilogram in lead, 20 watt-hours per kilogram nickel-cadmium, 40 watt-hours per kilogram in nickel-metal hydride, 60 watt-hours per kilogram in lithium, 8,750 watt-hours of energy in every kilogram of propane or gasoline -- which is why nobody drives electric cars.
But, in any event, if you can burn it with the same efficiency -- because it's external combustion -- as your kitchen stove, if you can burn any fuel, it turns out to be pretty neat.
It makes just enough electricity to, for instance, do this, which at night is enough electricity, in the rest of the world, as Mr. Holly -- Dr. Holly -- pointed out, can run computers and a light bulb.
But more interestingly, the thermodynamics of this say, you're never going to get more than 20 percent efficiency.
It doesn't matter much -- it says if you get 200 watts of electricity, you'll get 700 or 800 watts of heat.
If you wanted to boil water and re-condense it at a rate of 10 gallons an hour, it takes about 25, a little over 25.3 kilowatt -- 25,000 watts of continuous power -- to do it.
That's so much energy, you couldn't afford to desalinate or clean water in this country that way.
Certainly, in the rest of the world, your choice is to devastate the place, turning everything that will burn into heat, or drink the water that's available.
The number one cause of death on this planet among humans is bad water.
Depending on whose numbers you believe, it's between 60 and 85,000 people per day.
We don't need sophisticated heart transplants around the world.
We need water.
And women shouldn't have to spend four hours a day looking for it, or watching their kids die.
We figured out how to put a vapor-compression distiller on this thing, with a counter-flow heat exchanger to take the waste heat, then using a little bit of the electricity control that process, and for 450 watts, which is a little more than half of its waste heat, it will make 10 gallons an hour of distilled water from anything that comes into it to cool it.
So if we put this box on here in a few years, could we have a solution to transportation, electricity, and communication, and maybe drinkable water in a sustainable package that weighs 60 pounds?
I don't know, but we'll try it.
I better shut up.
(Applause)
This meeting has really been about a digital revolution, but I'd like to argue that it's done; we won.
We've had a digital revolution but we don't need to keep having it.
And I'd like to look after that, to look what comes after the digital revolution.
So, let me start projecting forward.
These are some projects I'm involved in today at MIT, looking what comes after computers.
This first one, Internet Zero, up here -- this is a web server that has the cost and complexity of an RFID tag -- about a dollar -- that can go in every light bulb and doorknob, and this is getting commercialized very quickly.
And what's interesting about it isn't the cost; it's the way it encodes the Internet.
It uses a kind of a Morse code for the Internet so you could send it optically; you can communicate acoustically through a power line, through RF.
It takes the original principle of the Internet, which is inter-networking computers, and now lets devices inter-network.
That we can take the whole idea that gave birth to the Internet and bring it down to the physical world in this Internet Zero, this internet of devices.
So this is the next step from there to here, and this is getting commercialized today.
A step after that is a project on fungible computers.
Fungible goods in economics can be extended and traded.
So, half as much grain is half as much useful, but half a baby or half a computer is less useful than a whole baby or a whole computer, and we've been trying to make computers that work that way.
So, what you see in the background is a prototype.
