And Dr. Terry Erwin, in 1983, called the canopy, "the last biotic frontier."
I'd like to take you all on a journey up to the forest canopy, and share with you what canopy researchers are asking and also how they're communicating with other people outside of science.
Let's start our journey on the forest floor of one of my study sites in Costa Rica.
Because of the overhanging leaves and branches, you'll notice that the understory is very dark, it's very still.
And what I'd like to do is take you up to the canopy, not by putting all of you into ropes and harnesses, but rather showing you a very short clip from a National Geographic film called "Heroes of the High Frontier."
This was filmed in Monteverde, Costa Rica and I think it gives us the best impression of what it's like to climb a giant strangler fig.
(Music) (Growling) (Rustling) So what you'll see up there is that it's really like the atmosphere of an open field, and there are tremendous numbers of plants and animals that have adapted to make their way and their life in the canopy.
Common groups, like the sloth here, have clear adaptations for forest canopies, hanging on with their very strong claws.
But I'd like to describe to you a more subtle kind of diversity and tell you about the ants.
There are 10,000 species of ants that taxonomists -- people who describe and name animals -- have named.
4,000 of those ants live exclusively in the forest canopy.
One of the reasons I tell you about ants is because of my husband, who is in fact an ant taxonomist and when we got married, he promised to name an ant after me, which he did -- Procryptocerus nalini, a canopy ant.
We've had two children, August Andrew and Erika and actually, he named ants after them.
So we may be the only family that has an ant named after each one of us.
But my passion -- in addition to Jack and my children -- are the plants, the so-called epiphytes, those plants that grow up on trees.
They don't have roots that go into trunks nor to the forest floor.
But rather, it is their leaves that are adapted to intercept the dissolved nutrients that come to them in the form of mist and fog.
These plants occur in great diversity, over 28,000 species around the world.
They grow in tropical forests like this one and they also grow in temperate rainforests, that we find in Washington state.
These epiphytes are mainly dominated by the mosses.
One thing I want to point out is that underneath these live epiphytes, as they die and decompose, they actually construct an arboreal soil, both in the temperate zone and in the tropics.
And these mosses, generated by decomposing, are like peat moss in your garden.
They have a tremendous capacity for holding on to nutrients and water.
One of the surprising things I discovered is that, if you pull back with me on those mats of epiphytes, what you'll find underneath them are connections, networks of what we call canopy roots.
These are not epiphyte roots: these are roots that emerge from the trunk and branch of the host trees themselves.
And so those epiphytes are actually paying the landlord a bit of rent in exchange for being supported high above the forest floor.
I was interested, and my canopy researcher colleagues have been interested in the dynamics of the canopy plants that live in the forest.
We've done stripping experiments where we've removed mats of epiphytes and looked at the rates of recolonization.
We had predicted that they would grow back very quickly and that they would come in encroaching from the side.
What we found, however, was that they took an extremely long time -- over 20 years -- to regenerate, starting from the bottom and growing up.
And even now, after 25 years, they're not up there, they have not recolonized completely.
And I use this little image to say this is what happens to mosses.
If it's gone, it's gone, and if you're really lucky you might get something growing back from the bottom.
(Laughter) So, recolonization is really very slow.
These canopy communities are fragile.
Well, when we look out, you and I, over that canopy of the intact primary forest, what we see is this enormous carpet of carbon.
One of the challenges that canopy researchers are attacking today is trying to understand the amount of carbon that is being sequestered.
We know it's a lot, but we do not yet know the answers to how much, and by what processes, carbon is being taken out of the atmosphere, held in its biomass, and moving on through the ecosystem.
So I hope I've showed you that canopy-dwellers are not just insignificant bits of green up high in the canopy that Tarzan and Jane were interested in, but rather that they foster biodiversity contribute to ecosystem nutrient cycles, and they also help to keep our global climate stable.
Up in the canopy, if you were sitting next to me and you turned around from those primary forest ecosystems, you would also see scenes like this.
Scenes of forest destruction, forest harvesting and forest fragmentation, thereby making that intact tapestry of the canopy unable to function in the marvelous ways that it has when it is not disturbed by humans.
I've also looked out on urban places like this and thought about people who are disassociated from trees in their lives.
People who grew up in a place like this did not have the opportunity to climb trees and form a relationship with trees and forests, as I did when I was a young girl.
This troubles me.
Here in 2009, you know, it's not an easy thing to be a forest ecologist, gripping ourselves with these kinds of questions and trying to figure out how we can answer them.
And especially, you know, as a small brown woman in a little college, in the upper northwest part of our country, far away from the areas of power and money, I really have to ask myself, "What can I do about this?
How can I reconnect people with trees?"
Well, I think that I can do something.
I know that as a scientist, I have information and as a human being, I can communicate with anybody, inside or outside of academia.
And so, that's what I've begin doing, and so I'd like to unveil the International Canopy Network here.
We consult to the media about canopy questions; we have a canopy newsletter; we have an email LISTSERV.
And so we're trying to disseminate information about the importance of the canopy, the beauty of the canopy, the necessity of intact canopies, to people outside of academia.
We also recognize that a lot of the products that we make -- those videos and so forth -- you know, they don't reach everybody, and so we've been fostering projects that reach people outside of academia, and outside of the choir that most ecologists preach to.
Treetop Barbie is a great example of that.
What we do, my students in my lab and I, is we buy Barbies from Goodwill and Value Village, we dress her in clothes that have been made by seamstresses and we send her out with a canopy handbook.
And my feeling is -- (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) -- that we've taken this pop icon and we have just tweaked her a little bit to become an ambassador who can carry the message that being a woman scientist studying treetops is actually a really great thing.
We've also made partnerships with artists, with people who understand and can communicate the aesthetic beauty of trees and forest canopies.
And I'd like to just tell you one of our projects, which is the generation of Canopy Confluences.
What I do is I bring together scientists and artists of all kinds, and we spend a week in the forest on these little platforms; and we look at nature, we look at trees, we look at the canopy, and we communicate, and exchange, and express what we see together.
The results have been fantastic.
I'll just give you a few examples.
This is a fantastic installation by Bruce Chao who is chair of the Sculpture and Glass Blowing Department at Rhode Island School of Design.
He saw nests in the canopy at one of our Canopy Confluences in the Pacific Northwest, and created this beautiful sculpture.
We've had dance people up in the canopy.
Jodi Lomask, and her wonderful troupe Capacitor, joined me in the canopy in my rainforest site in Costa Rica.
They made a fabulous dance called "Biome."
They danced in the forest, and we are taking this dance, my scientific outreach communications, and also linking up with environmental groups, to go to different cities and to perform the science, the dance and the environmental outreach that we hope will make a difference.
We brought musicians to the canopy, and they made their music -- and it's fantastic music.
We had wooden flutists, we had oboists, we had opera singers, we had guitar players, and we had rap singers.
And I brought a little segment to give you of Duke Brady's "Canopy Rap."
(Music) That's Duke!
(Applause) This experience of working with Duke also led me to initiate a program called Sound Science.
I saw the power of Duke's song with urban youth -- an audience, you know, I as a middle-aged professor, I don't have a hope of getting to -- in terms of convincing them of the importance of wildlands.
So I engaged Caution, this rap singer, with a group of young people from inner-city Tacoma.
We went out to the forest, I would pick up a branch, Caution would rap on it, and suddenly that branch was really cool.
And then the students would come into our sound studios, they would make their own rap songs with their own beats.
They ended up making a CD which they took home to their family and friends, thereby expressing their own experiences with nature in their own medium.
The final project I'll talk about is one that's very close to my heart, and it involves an economic and social value that is associated with epiphytic plants.
In the Pacific Northwest, there's a whole industry of moss-harvesting from old-growth forests.
These mosses are taken from the forest; they're used by the floriculture industry, by florists, to make arrangements and make hanging baskets.
It's a 265 million dollar industry and it's increasing rapidly.
If you remember that bald guy, you'll know that what has been stripped off of these trunks in the Pacific Northwest old-growth forest is going to take decades and decades to come back.
So this whole industry is unsustainable.
What can I, as an ecologist, do about that?
Well, my thought was that I could learn how to grow mosses, and that way we wouldn't have to take them out of the wild.
And I thought, if I had some partners that could help me with this, that would be great.
And so, I thought perhaps incarcerated men and women -- who don't have access to nature, who often have a lot of time, they often have space, and you don't need any sharp tools to work with mosses -- would be great partners.
And they have become excellent partners.
The best I can imagine.
They were very enthusiastic.
(Applause) They were incredibly enthusiastic about the work.
They learned how to distinguish different species of mosses, which, to tell you the truth, is a lot more than my undergraduate students at the Evergreen College can do.
And they embraced the idea that they could help develop a research design in order to grow these mosses.
We've been successful as partners in figuring out which species grow the fastest, and I've just been overwhelmed with how successful this has been.
Because the prison wardens were very enthusiastic about this as well, I started a Science and Sustainability Seminar in the prisons.
I brought my scientific colleagues and sustainability practitioners into the prison.
We gave talks once a month, and that actually ended up implementing some amazing sustainability projects at the prisons -- organic gardens, worm culture, recycling, water catchment and beekeeping. (Applause) Our latest endeavor, with a grant from the Department of Corrections at Washington state, they've asked us to expand this program to three more prisons.
And our new project is having the inmates and ourselves learn how to raise the Oregon spotted frog which is a highly endangered amphibian in Washington state and Oregon.
So they will raise them -- in captivity, of course -- from eggs to tadpoles and onward to frogs.
And they will have the pleasure, many of them, of seeing those frogs that they've raised from eggs and helped develop, helped nurture, move out into protected wildlands to augment the number of endangered species out there in the wild.
And so, I think for many reasons -- ecological, social, economic and perhaps even spiritual -- this has been a tremendous project and I'm really looking forward to not only myself and my students doing it, but also to promote and teach other scientists how to do this.
As many of you are aware, the world of academia is a rather inward-looking one.
I'm trying to help researchers move more outward to have their own partnerships with people outside of the academic community.
And so I'm hoping that my husband Jack, the ant taxonomist, can perhaps work with Mattel to make Taxonomist Ken.
Perhaps Ben Zander and Bill Gates could get together and make an opera about AIDS.
Or perhaps Al Gore and Naturally 7 could make a song about climate change that would really make you clap your hands.
So, although it's a little bit of a fantasy, I think it's also a reality.
Given the duress that we're feeling environmentally in these times, it is time for scientists to reach outward, and time for those outside of science to reach towards academia as well.
I started my career with trying to understand the mysteries of forests with the tools of science.
By making these partnerships that I described to you, I have really opened my mind and, I have to say, my heart to have a greater understanding, to make other discoveries about nature and myself.
When I look into my heart, I see trees -- this is actually an image of a real heart -- there are trees in our hearts, there are trees in your hearts.
When we come to understand nature, we are touching the most deep, the most important parts of our self.
In these partnerships, I have also learned that people tend to compartmentalize themselves into IT people, and movie star people, and scientists, but when we share nature, when we share our perspectives about nature, we find a common denominator.
Finally, as a scientist and as a person and now, as part of the TED community, I feel that I have better tools to go out to trees, to go out to forests, to go out to nature, to make new discoveries about nature -- and about humans' place in nature wherever we are and whomever you are.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The "Dirty Jobs" crew and I were called to a little town in Colorado, called Craig.
It's only a couple dozen square miles.
It's in the Rockies.
My role on the show, for those of you who haven't seen it -- it's pretty simple.
I'm an apprentice, and I work with the people who do the jobs in question.
And my responsibilities are to simply try and keep up, and give an honest account of what it's like to be these people for one day in their life.
The job in question: herding sheep.
Great.
We go to Craig and we check into a hotel, and I realize the next day that castration is going to be an absolute part of this work.
Normally, I never do any research at all.
But this is a touchy subject, and I work for the Discovery Channel, and we want to portray accurately whatever it is we do.
And we certainly want to do it with a lot of respect for the animals.
So I call the Humane Society and I say, "Look, I'm going to be castrating some lambs. Can you tell me the deal?"
And they're like, "Yeah, it's pretty straightforward."
They use a band, basically, a rubber band, like this, only a little smaller.
This one was actually around the playing cards I got yesterday -- (Laughter) But it had a certain familiarity to it.
And I said, "Well, what exactly is the process?"
And they said, "The band is applied to the tail, tightly.
And then another band is applied to the scrotum, tightly.
Blood flow is slowly retarded; a week later the parts in question fall off.
"Great -- got it."
OK, I call the SPCA to confirm this.
I also call PETA just for fun, and they don't like it, but they confirm it.
OK, that's basically how you do it.
So the next day I go out.
And I'm given a horse and we go get the lambs and we take them to a pen that we built, and we go about the business of animal husbandry.
Melanie is the wife of Albert.
Albert is the shepherd in question.
Melanie picks up the lamb, one hand on both legs on the right, likewise on the left.
Lamb goes on the post, she opens it up.
Albert goes in, I follow Albert, the crew is around.
I always watch the process done the first time before I try it.
Being an apprentice, you know, you do that.
Albert reaches in his pocket to pull out, you know, this black rubber band, but what comes out instead is a knife.
And I'm like, "Hmm, that's not rubber at all," you know?
(Laughter) And he kind of flicked it open in a way that caught the sun that was just coming over the Rockies, it was very -- (Laughter) It was ... it was impressive.
In the space of about two seconds, Albert had the knife between the cartilage of the tail, right next to the butt of the lamb, and very quickly, the tail was gone and in the bucket that I was holding.
A second later, with a big thumb and a well-calloused forefinger, he had the scrotum firmly in his grasp.
And he pulled it toward him, like so, and he took the knife and he put it on the tip.
"Now, you think you know what's coming, Michael, You don't, OK?"
(Laughter) He snips it, throws the tip over his shoulder, and then grabs the scrotum and pushes it upward, and then his head dips down, obscuring my view.
But what I hear is a slurping sound, and a noise that sounds like Velcro being yanked off a sticky wall, and I am not even kidding.
Can we roll the video?
No, I'm kidding, we don't -- (Laughter) I thought it best to talk in pictures.
I say, "Time out. Stop."
You guys know the show, we use take one; we don't do take two.
There's no writing, there's no scripting, there's no nonsense.
We don't fool around, we don't rehearse -- we shoot what we get!
I said, "Stop. This is nuts."
I mean -- (Laughter) "This is crazy.
We can't do this."
And Albert's like, "What?"
And I'm like, "I don't know what just happened, but there are testicles in this bucket, and that's not how we do it."
He said "Well, that's how we do it."
I said, "Why would you do it this way?"
And before I even let him explain, I said, "I want to do it the right way, with the rubber bands."
And he says, "Like the Humane Society?"
I said, "Yes, like the Humane Society.
Let's do something that doesn't make the lamb squeal and bleed.
We're on in five continents, dude!
We're on twice a day on the Discovery -- we can't do this."
He says, "OK."
Melanie picks up another lamb, puts it on the post, band goes on the tail, band goes on the scrotum.
Lamb goes on the ground, lamb takes two steps, falls down, gets up, shakes a little, takes another couple steps, falls down.
I'm like, this is not a good sign for this lamb, at all.
Gets up, walks to the corner.
It's quivering, and it lies down and it's in obvious distress.
And I'm looking at the lamb and I say, "Albert, how long?
When does he get up?"
He's like, "A day?"
I said, "A day! How long does it take them to fall off?"
"A week."
Meanwhile, the lamb that he had just done his little procedure on is, you know, he's just prancing around, bleeding stopped.
He's, you know, nibbling on some grass, frolicking.
And I was just so blown away at how completely wrong I was, in that second.
(Laughter) And I was especially reminded of what a ridiculously short straw I had that day, because now I had to do what Albert had just done, and there are like 100 of these lambs in the pen.
And suddenly, this whole thing's starting to feel like a German porno, and I'm like -- (Laughter) Melanie picks up the lamb, puts it on the post, opens it up.
Albert hands me the knife.
I go in, tail comes off.
I go in, I grab the scrotum, tip comes off.
Albert instructs, "Push it way up there."
I do.
I do.
The testicles emerge. They look like thumbs, coming right at you.
And he says, "Bite 'em.
Just bite 'em off."
(Laughter) And I heard him, I heard all the words -- (Laughter) Like, how did I get here?
How did -- I mean -- how did I get here?
It's just -- it's one of those moments where the brain goes off on its own, and suddenly, I'm standing there in the Rockies, and all I can think of is the Aristotelian definition of a tragedy.
You know, Aristotle says a tragedy is that moment when the hero comes face to face with his true identity.
(Laughter) And I'm like, "What is this jacked-up metaphor?
I don't like what I'm thinking right now."
And I can't get this thought out of my head, and I can't get that vision out of my sight, so I did what I had to do.
I went in and I took them.
I took them like this, and I yanked my head back.
And I'm standing there with two testicles on my chin.
(Laughter) And now I can't get -- I can't shake the metaphor.
I'm still in "Poetics," in Aristotle, and I'm thinking -- out of nowhere, two terms come crashing into my head, that I hadn't heard since my classics professor in college drilled them there.
And they are "anagnorisis" and "peripeteia."
Anagnorisis and peripeteia.
Literally, the transition from ignorance to knowledge is anagnorisis.
It's what our network does; it's what "Dirty Jobs" is.
And I'm up to my neck in anagnorises every single day.
Great.
The other word, peripeteia, that's the moment in the great tragedies -- Euripides and Sophocles.
That's the moment where Oedipus has his moment, where he suddenly realizes that hot chick he's been sleeping with and having babies with is his mother.
That's peripety, or peripeteia.
And this metaphor in my head -- I've got anagnorisis and peripeteia on my chin -- (Laughter) I've got to tell you, it's such a great device, though.
When you start to look for peripeteia, you find it everywhere.
Spends the whole movie trying to help the little kid who sees dead people, and then -- boom! -- "Oh, I'm dead."
Peripeteia. You know?
It's crushing when the audience sees it the right way.
Neo in "The Matrix," you know?
"Oh, I'm living in a computer program.
That's weird."
And I've been having them, over 200 dirty jobs, I have them all the time, but that one -- that one drilled something home in a way that I just wasn't prepared for.
And, as I stood there, looking at the happy lamb that I had just defiled -- but it looked OK; looking at that poor other little thing that I'd done it the right way on, and I just was struck by -- if I'm wrong about that, and if I'm wrong so often, in a literal way, what other peripatetic misconceptions might I be able to comment upon?
Because, look -- I'm not a social anthropologist, but I have a friend who is.
And I talk to him.
(Laughter) And he says, "Hey Mike, look.
I don't know if your brain is interested in this sort of thing or not, but do you realize you've shot in every state?
You've worked in mining, you've worked in fishing, you've worked in steel, you've worked in every major industry.
You've had your back shoulder to shoulder with these guys that our politicians are desperate to relate to every four years, right?"
I can still see Hillary doing the shots of rye, dribbling down her chin, with the steel workers.
"And if you have something to say about their thoughts, collectively, it might be time to think about it.
Because, dude, you know, four years."
So, that's in my head, testicles are on my chin, thoughts are bouncing around.
And, after that shoot, "Dirty Jobs" really didn't change, in terms of what the show is, but it changed for me, personally.
And now, when I talk about the show, I no longer just tell the story you heard and 190 like it.
I do, but I also start to talk about some of the other things I got wrong; some of the other notions of work that I've just been assuming are sacrosanct, and they're not.
People with dirty jobs are happier than you think.
As a group, they're the happiest people I know.
And I don't want to start whistling "Look for the Union Label," and all that happy-worker crap.
I'm just telling you that these are balanced people who do unthinkable work.
Roadkill picker-uppers whistle while they work, I swear to God -- I did it with them.
They've got this amazing sort of symmetry to their life.
And I see it over and over and over again.
So I started to wonder what would happen if we challenged some of these sacred cows?
Follow your passion -- we've been talking about it here for the last 36 hours.
Follow your passion -- what could possibly be wrong with that?
It's probably the worst advice I ever got.
(Laughter) Follow your dreams and go broke, right?
I mean, that's all I heard growing up.
I didn't know what to do with my life, but I was told if you follow your passion, it's going to work out.
I can give you 30 examples right now.
Bob Combs, the pig farmer in Las Vegas who collects the uneaten scraps of food from the casinos and feeds them to his swine.
Why?
Because there's so much protein in the stuff we don't eat, his pigs grow at twice the normal speed, and he's one rich pig farmer.
He's good for the environment, he spends his days doing this incredible service, and he smells like hell, but God bless him.
You ask him, "Did you follow your passion here?"
and he'd laugh at you.
The guy's worth -- he just got offered like 60 million dollars for his farm and turned it down, outside of Vegas.
He didn't follow his passion.
He stepped back and he watched where everybody was going, and he went the other way.
Matt Freund, a dairy farmer in New Canaan, Connecticut, who woke up one day and realized the crap from his cows was worth more than their milk, if he could use it to make these biodegradable flowerpots.
Now he's selling them to Walmart, right?
So I started to look at passion, I started to look at efficiency vs. effectiveness.
As Tim talked about earlier, that's a huge distinction.
I started to look at teamwork and determination.
And basically, all those platitudes they call "successories" that hang with that schmaltzy art in boardrooms around the world right now, that stuff -- it's suddenly all been turned on its head.
Safety. Safety first is ...
Going back to OSHA and PETA and the Humane Society: What if OSHA got it wrong?
I mean -- this is heresy, what I'm about to say -- but what if it's really safety third?
Right?
(Laughter) No, I mean, really.
What I mean to say is: I value my safety on these crazy jobs as much as the people that I'm working with, but the ones who really get it done -- they're not out there talking about safety first.
They know that other things come first -- the business of doing the work comes first, the business of getting it done.
And I'll never forget, up in the Bering Sea, I was on a crab boat with the "Deadliest Catch" guys -- which I also work on in the first season.
We were about 100 miles off the coast of Russia: 50-foot seas, big waves, green water coming over the wheelhouse, right?
Most hazardous environment I'd ever seen, and I was back with a guy, lashing the pots down.
So I'm 40 feet off the deck, which is like looking down at the top of your shoe, you know, and it's doing this in the ocean.
I scamper down, I go into the wheelhouse and I say, with some level of incredulity, "Captain -- OSHA?"
And he points out there.
(Laughter) But in that moment, what he said next can't be repeated in the Lower 48.
It can't be repeated on any factory floor or any construction site.
But he looked at me and said, "Son," -- he's my age, by the way, he calls me "son," I love that -- he says, "Son, I'm the captain of a crab boat.
My responsibility is not to get you home alive.
My responsibility is to get you home rich."
(Laughter) You want to get home alive, that's on you."
And for the rest of that day -- safety first.
I mean, I was like -- So, the idea that we create this sense of complacency when all we do is talk about somebody else's responsibility as though it's our own, and vice versa.
Anyhow, a whole lot of things.
I could talk at length about the many little distinctions we made and the endless list of ways that I got it wrong.
But what it all comes down to is this: I've formed a theory, and I'm going to share it now in my remaining 2 minutes and 30 seconds.
It goes like this: we've declared war on work, as a society -- all of us.
It's a civil war.
We didn't set out to do it and we didn't twist our mustache in some Machiavellian way, but we've done it.
And we've waged this war on at least four fronts, certainly in Hollywood.
The way we portray working people on TV -- it's laughable.
If there's a plumber, he's 300 pounds and he's got a giant butt crack, admit it.
You see him all the time.
That's what plumbers look like, right?
We turn them into heroes, or we turn them into punch lines.
That's what TV does.
We try hard on "Dirty Jobs" not to do that, which is why I do the work and I don't cheat.
So many of the commercials that come out there in the way of a message -- what's really being said?
"Your life would be better if you could work a little less, didn't have to work so hard, got home a little earlier, could retire a little faster, punch out a little sooner."
Washington?
I can't even begin to talk about the deals and policies in place that affect the bottom-line reality of the available jobs, because I don't really know; I just know that that's a front in this war.
And right here, guys -- Silicon Valley.
I mean -- how many people have an iPhone on them right now?
How many people have their BlackBerry?
We're plugged in; we're connected.
I would never suggest for a second that something bad has come out of the tech revolution.
Good grief, not to this crowd.
(Laughter) But I would suggest that innovation without imitation is a complete waste of time.
And nobody celebrates imitation the way "Dirty Jobs" guys know it has to be done.
Your iPhone without those people making the same interface, the same circuitry, the same board, over and over -- all of that -- that's what makes it equally as possible as the genius that goes inside of it.
So, we've got this new toolbox. You know?
Our tools today don't look like shovels and picks.
They look like the stuff we walk around with.
And so the collective effect of all of that has been this marginalization of lots and lots of jobs.
And I realized, probably too late in this game -- I hope not, because I don't know if I can do 200 more of these things -- but we're going to do as many as we can.
And to me, the most important thing to know and to really come face to face with, is that fact that I got it wrong about a lot of things, not just the testicles on my chin.
I got a lot wrong.
So, we're thinking -- by "we," I mean me -- (Laughter) that the thing to do is to talk about a PR campaign for work -- manual labor, skilled labor.
Somebody needs to be out there, talking about the forgotten benefits.
I'm talking about grandfather stuff, the stuff a lot us probably grew up with but we've kind of -- you know, kind of lost a little.
Barack wants to create two and a half million jobs.
This war on work that I suppose exists, has casualties like any other war.
The infrastructure is the first one, declining trade school enrollments are the second one.
Every single year, fewer electricians, fewer carpenters, fewer plumbers, fewer welders, fewer pipe fitters, fewer steam fitters.
The infrastructure jobs that everybody is talking about creating are those guys -- the ones that have been in decline, over and over.
Meanwhile, we've got two trillion dollars, at a minimum, according to the American Society of Civil Engineers, that we need to expend to even make a dent in the infrastructure, which is currently rated at a D minus.
So, if I were running for anything -- and I'm not -- I would simply say that the jobs we hope to make and the jobs we hope to create aren't going to stick unless they're jobs that people want.
And I know the point of this conference is to celebrate things that are near and dear to us, but I also know that clean and dirty aren't opposites.
They're two sides of the same coin, just like innovation and imitation, like risk and responsibility, like peripeteia and anagnorisis, like that poor little lamb, who I hope isn't quivering anymore, and like my time that's gone.
It's been great talking to you.
And get back to work, will you?
(Applause)
So anyway, who am I?
I usually say to people, when they say, "What do you do?"
I say, "I do hardware," because it sort of conveniently encompasses everything I do.
And I recently said that to a venture capitalist casually at some Valley event, to which he replied, "How quaint."
(Laughter) And I sort of really was dumbstruck.
And I really should have said something smart.
And now I've had a little bit of time to think about it, I would have said, "Well, you know, if we look at the next 100 years and we've seen all these problems in the last few days, most of the big issues -- clean water, clean energy -- and they're interchangeable in some respects -- and cleaner, more functional materials -- they all look to me to be hardware problems.
This doesn't mean we should ignore software, or information, or computation."
And that's in fact probably what I'm going to try and tell you about.
So, this talk is going to be about how do we make things and what are the new ways that we're going to make things in the future.
Now, TED sends you a lot of spam if you're a speaker about "do this, do that" and you fill out all these forms, and you don't actually know how they're going to describe you, and it flashed across my desk that they were going to introduce me as a futurist.
And I've always been nervous about the term "futurist," because you seem doomed to failure because you can't really predict it.
And I was laughing about this with the very smart colleagues I have, and said, "You know, well, if I have to talk about the future, what is it?"
And George Homsey, a great guy, said, "Oh, the future is amazing.
It is so much stranger than you think.
We're going to reprogram the bacteria in your gut, and we're going to make your poo smell like peppermint."
(Laughter) So, you may think that's sort of really crazy, but there are some pretty amazing things that are happening that make this possible.
So, this isn't my work, but it's work of good friends of mine at MIT.
This is called the registry of standard biological parts.
This is headed by Drew Endy and Tom Knight and a few other very, very bright individuals.
Basically, what they're doing is looking at biology as a programmable system.
Literally, think of proteins as subroutines that you can string together to execute a program.
Now, this is actually becoming such an interesting idea.
This is a state diagram. That's an extremely simple computer.
This one is a two-bit counter.
So that's essentially the computational equivalent of two light switches.
And this is being built by a group of students at Zurich for a design competition in biology.
And from the results of the same competition last year, a University of Texas team of students programmed bacteria so that they can detect light and switch on and off.
So this is interesting in the sense that you can now do "if-then-for" statements in materials, in structure.
This is a pretty interesting trend, because we used to live in a world where everyone's said glibly, "Form follows function," but I think I've sort of grown up in a world -- you listened to Neil Gershenfeld yesterday; I was in a lab associated with his -- where it's really a world where information defines form and function.
I spent six years thinking about that, but to show you the power of art over science -- this is actually one of the cartoons I write. These are called "HowToons."
I work with a fabulous illustrator called Nick Dragotta.
Took me six years at MIT, and about that many pages to describe what I was doing, and it took him one page. And so this is our muse Tucker.
He's an interesting little kid -- and his sister, Celine -- and what he's doing here is observing the self-assembly of his Cheerios in his cereal bowl.
And in fact you can program the self-assembly of things, so he starts chocolate-dipping edges, changing the hydrophobicity and the hydrophylicity.
In theory, if you program those sufficiently, you should be able to do something pretty interesting and make a very complex structure.
In this case, he's done self-replication of a complex 3D structure.
And that's what I thought about for a long time, because this is how we currently make things.
This is a silicon wafer, and essentially that's just a whole bunch of layers of two-dimensional stuff, sort of layered up.
The feature side is -- you know, people will say, [unclear] down around about 65 nanometers now.
On the right, that's a radiolara.
That's a unicellular organism ubiquitous in the oceans.
And that has feature sizes down to about 20 nanometers, and it's a complex 3D structure.
We could do a lot more with computers and things generally if we knew how to build things this way.
The secret to biology is, it builds computation into the way it makes things. So this little thing here, polymerase, is essentially a supercomputer designed for replicating DNA.
And the ribosome here is another little computer that helps in the translation of the proteins.
I thought about this in the sense that it's great to build in biological materials, but can we do similar things?
Can we get self-replicating-type behavior?
Can we get complex 3D structure automatically assembling in inorganic systems?
Because there are some advantages to inorganic systems, like higher speed semiconductors, etc.
So, this is some of my work on how do you do an autonomously self-replicating system.
And this is sort of Babbage's revenge.
These are five-state state machines.
So, that's about three light switches lined up.
In a neutral state, they won't bind at all.
Now, if I make a string of these, a bit string, they will be able to replicate.
So we start with white, blue, blue, white.
That encodes; that will now copy. From one comes two, and then from two comes three.
And so you've got this sort of replicating system.
It was work actually by Lionel Penrose, father of Roger Penrose, the tiles guy.
He did a lot of this work in the '60s, and so a lot of this logic theory lay fallow as we went down the digital computer revolution, but it's now coming back.
So now I'm going to show you the hands-free, autonomous self-replication.
So we've tracked in the video the input string, which was green, green, yellow, yellow, green.
We set them off on this air hockey table.
You know, high science uses air hockey tables -- (Laughter) -- and if you watch this thing long enough you get dizzy, but what you're actually seeing is copies of that original string emerging from the parts bin that you have here.
So we've got autonomous replication of bit strings.
So, why would you want to replicate bit strings?
Well, it turns out biology has this other very interesting meme, that you can take a linear string, which is a convenient thing to copy, and you can fold that into an arbitrarily complex 3D structure.
So I was trying to, you know, take the engineer's version: Can we build a mechanical system in inorganic materials that will do the same thing?
So what I'm showing you here is that we can make a 2D shape -- the B -- assemble from a string of components that follow extremely simple rules.
And the whole point of going with the extremely simple rules here, and the incredibly simple state machines in the previous design, was that you don't need digital logic to do computation.
And that way you can scale things much smaller than microchips.
So you can literally use these as the tiny components in the assembly process.
So, Neil Gershenfeld showed you this video on Wednesday, I believe, but I'll show you again.
This is literally the colored sequence of those tiles.
Each different color has a different magnetic polarity, and the sequence is uniquely specifying the structure that is coming out.
Now, hopefully, those of you who know anything about graph theory can look at that, and that will satisfy you that that can also do arbitrary 3D structure, and in fact, you know, I can now take a dog, carve it up and then reassemble it so it's a linear string that will fold from a sequence. And now I can actually define that three-dimensional object as a sequence of bits.
So, you know, it's a pretty interesting world when you start looking at the world a little bit differently.
And the universe is now a compiler.
And so I'm thinking about, you know, what are the programs for programming the physical universe?
And how do we think about materials and structure, sort of as an information and computation problem?
Not just where you attach a micro-controller to the end point, but that the structure and the mechanisms are the logic, are the computers.
Having totally absorbed this philosophy, I started looking at a lot of problems a little differently.
With the universe as a computer, you can look at this droplet of water as having performed the computations.
You set a couple of boundary conditions, like gravity, the surface tension, density, etc., and then you press "execute," and magically, the universe produces you a perfect ball lens.
So, this actually applied to the problem of -- so there's a half a billion to a billion people in the world don't have access to cheap eyeglasses.
So can you make a machine that could make any prescription lens very quickly on site?
This is a machine where you literally define a boundary condition.
If it's circular, you make a spherical lens.
If it's elliptical, you can make an astigmatic lens.
You then put a membrane on that and you apply pressure -- so that's part of the extra program.
And literally with only those two inputs -- so, the shape of your boundary condition and the pressure -- you can define an infinite number of lenses that cover the range of human refractive error, from minus 12 to plus eight diopters, up to four diopters of cylinder.
And then literally, you now pour on a monomer.
You know, I'll do a Julia Childs here.
This is three minutes of UV light.
And you reverse the pressure on your membrane once you've cooked it. Pop it out.
I've seen this video, but I still don't know if it's going to end right.
(Laughter) So you reverse this. This is a very old movie, so with the new prototypes, actually both surfaces are flexible, but this will show you the point.
Now you've finished the lens, you literally pop it out.
That's next year's Yves Klein, you know, eyeglasses shape.
And you can see that that has a mild prescription of about minus two diopters.
And as I rotate it against this side shot, you'll see that that has cylinder, and that was programmed in -- literally into the physics of the system.
So, this sort of thinking about structure as computation and structure as information leads to other things, like this.
This is something that my people at SQUID Labs are working on at the moment, called "electronic rope."
So literally, you think about a rope. It has very complex structure in the weave.
And under no load, it's one structure.
Under a different load, it's a different structure. And you can actually exploit that by putting in a very small number of conducting fibers to actually make it a sensor.
So this is now a rope that knows the load on the rope at any particular point in the rope.
Just by thinking about the physics of the world, materials as the computer, you can start to do things like this.
I'm going to segue a little here.
I guess I'm just going to casually tell you the types of things that I think about with this.
One thing I'm really interested about this right now is, how, if you're really taking this view of the universe as a computer, how do we make things in a very general sense, and how might we share the way we make things in a general sense the same way you share open source hardware?
And a lot of talks here have espoused the benefits of having lots of people look at problems, share the information and work on those things together.
So, a convenient thing about being a human is you move in linear time, and unless Lisa Randall changes that, we'll continue to move in linear time.
So that means anything you do, or anything you make, you produce a sequence of steps -- and I think Lego in the '70s nailed this, and they did it most elegantly.
But they can show you how to build things in sequence.
So, I'm thinking about, how can we generalize the way we make all sorts of things, so you end up with this sort of guy, right?
And I think this applies across a very broad -- sort of, a lot of concepts.
You know, Cameron Sinclair yesterday said, "How do I get everyone to collaborate on design globally to do housing for humanity?"
And if you've seen Amy Smith, she talks about how you get students at MIT to work with communities in Haiti.
And I think we have to sort of redefine and rethink how we define structure and materials and assembly things, so that we can really share the information on how you do those things in a more profound way and build on each other's source code for structure.
I don't know exactly how to do this yet, but, you know, it's something being actively thought about.
So, you know, that leads to questions like, is this a compiler? Is this a sub-routine?
Interesting things like that.
Maybe I'm getting a little too abstract, but you know, this is the sort of -- returning to our comic characters -- this is sort of the universe, or a different universe view, that I think is going to be very prevalent in the future -- from biotech to materials assembly. It was great to hear Bill Joy.
They're starting to invest in materials science, but these are the new things in materials science.
How do we put real information and real structure into new ideas, and see the world in a different way? And it's not going to be binary code that defines the computers of the universe -- it's sort of an analog computer.
But it's definitely an interesting new worldview.
I've gone too far. So that sounds like it's it.
I've probably got a couple of minutes of questions, or I can show -- I think they also said that I do extreme stuff in the introduction, so I may have to explain that.
So maybe I'll do that with this short video.
So this is actually a 3,000-square-foot kite, which also happens to be a minimal energy surface.
So returning to the droplet, again, thinking about the universe in a new way.
This is a kite designed by a guy called Dave Kulp.
And why do you want a 3,000-square-foot kite?
So that's a kite the size of your house.
And so you want that to tow boats very fast.
So I've been working on this a little, also, with a couple of other guys.
But, you know, this is another way to look at the -- if you abstract again, this is a structure that is defined by the physics of the universe.
You could just hang it as a bed sheet, but again, the computation of all the physics gives you the aerodynamic shape.
And so you can actually sort of almost double your boat speed with systems like that. So that's sort of another interesting aspect of the future.
(Applause)
The new me is beauty.
(Laughter) Yeah, people used to say, "Norman's OK, but if you followed what he said, everything would be usable but it would be ugly."
Well, I didn't have that in mind, so ...
This is neat.
Thank you for setting up my display.
I mean, it's just wonderful.
And I haven't the slightest idea of what it does or what it's good for, but I want it.
And that's my new life.
My new life is trying to understand what beauty is about, and "pretty," and "emotions."
The new me is all about making things kind of neat and fun.
And so this is a Philippe Starck juicer, produced by Alessi.
It's just neat; it's fun. It's so much fun I have it in my house -- but I have it in the entryway, I don't use it to make juice.
(Laughter) In fact, I bought the gold-plated special edition and it comes with a little slip of paper that says, "Don't use this juicer to make juice."
The acid will ruin the gold plating.
(Laughter) So actually, I took a carton of orange juice and I poured it in the glass to take this picture.
(Laughter) Beneath it is a wonderful knife.
It's a Global cutting knife made in Japan.
First of all, look at the shape -- it's just wonderful to look at.
Second of all, it's really beautifully balanced: it holds well, it feels well.
And third of all, it's so sharp, it just cuts.
It's a delight to use.
And so it's got everything, right?
It's beautiful and it's functional.
And I can tell you stories about it, which makes it reflective, and so you'll see I have a theory of emotion.
And those are the three components.
Hiroshi Ishii and his group at the MIT Media Lab took a ping-pong table and placed a projector above it, and on the ping-pong table they projected an image of water with fish swimming in it.
And as you play ping-pong, whenever the ball hits part of the table, the ripples spread out and the fish run away.
But of course, then the ball hits the other side, the ripples hit the -- poor fish, they can't find any peace and quiet.
(Laughter) Is that a good way to play ping-pong?
No. But is it fun?
Yeah! Yeah.
Or look at Google.
If you type in, oh say, "emotion and design," you get 10 pages of results.
So Google just took their logo and they spread it out.
Instead of saying, "You got 73,000 results.
This is one through 20. Next," they just give you as many o's as there are pages.
It's really simple and subtle.
I bet a lot of you have seen it and never noticed it.
That's the subconscious mind that sort of notices it -- it probably is kind of pleasant and you didn't know why.
And it's just clever.
And of course, what's especially good is, if you type "design and emotion," the first response out of those 10 pages is my website.
(Laughter) Now, the weird thing is Google lies, because if I type "design and emotion," it says, "You don't need the 'and.' We do it anyway."
So, OK.
So I type "design emotion" and my website wasn't first again.
It was third.
Oh well, different story.
There was this wonderful review in The New York Times about the MINI Cooper automobile.
It said, "You know, this is a car that has lots of faults.
Buy it anyway.
It's so much fun to drive."
And if you look at the inside of the car -- I mean, I loved it, I wanted to see it, I rented it, this is me taking a picture while my son is driving -- and the inside of the car, the whole design is fun.
It's round, it's neat.
The controls work wonderfully.
So that's my new life; it's all about fun.
I really have the feeling that pleasant things work better, and that never made any sense to me until I finally figured out -- look ...
I'm going to put a plank on the ground.
So, imagine I have a plank about two feet wide and 30 feet long and I'm going to walk on it, and you see I can walk on it without looking, I can go back and forth and I can jump up and down.
No problem.
Now I'm going to put the plank 300 feet in the air -- and I'm not going to go near it, thank you.
Intense fear paralyzes you.
It actually affects the way the brain works.
So, Paul Saffo, before his talk said that he didn't really have it down until just a few days or hours before the talk, and that anxiety was really helpful in causing him to focus.
That's what fear and anxiety does; it causes you to be -- what's called depth-first processing -- to focus, not be distracted.
And I couldn't force myself across that.
Now some people can -- circus workers, steel workers.
But it really changes the way you think.
And then, a psychologist, Alice Isen, did this wonderful experiment.
She brought students in to solve problems.
So, she'd bring people into the room, and there'd be a string hanging down here and a string hanging down here.
It was an empty room, except for a table with a bunch of crap on it -- some papers and scissors and stuff.
And she'd bring them in, and she'd say, "This is an IQ test and it determines how well you do in life.
Would you tie those two strings together?"
So they'd take one string and they'd pull it over here and they couldn't reach the other string.
Still can't reach it.
And, basically, none of them could solve it.
You bring in a second group of people, and you say, "Oh, before we start, I got this box of candy, and I don't eat candy.
Would you like the box of candy?"
And turns out they liked it, and it made them happy -- not very happy, but a little bit of happy.
And guess what -- they solved the problem.
And it turns out that when you're anxious you squirt neural transmitters in the brain, which focuses you makes you depth-first.
And when you're happy -- what we call positive valence -- you squirt dopamine into the prefrontal lobes, which makes you a breadth-first problem solver: you're more susceptible to interruption; you do out-of-the-box thinking.
That's what brainstorming is about, right?
With brainstorming we make you happy, we play games, and we say, "No criticism," and you get all these weird, neat ideas.
But in fact, if that's how you always were you'd never get any work done because you'd be working along and say, "Oh, I got a new way of doing it."
So to get work done, you've got to set a deadline, right?
You've got be anxious.
The brain works differently if you're happy. Things work better because you're more creative.
You get a little problem, you say, "Ah, I'll figure it out."
No big deal.
There's something I call the visceral level of processing, and there will be visceral-level design.
Biology -- we have co-adapted through biology to like bright colors.
That's especially good that mammals and primates like fruits and bright plants, because you eat the fruit and you thereby spread the seed.
There's an amazing amount of stuff that's built into the brain.
We dislike bitter tastes, we dislike loud sounds, we dislike hot temperatures, cold temperatures.
We dislike scolding voices. We dislike frowning faces; we like symmetrical faces, etc., etc.
So that's the visceral level.
In design, you can express visceral in lots of ways, like the choice of type fonts and the red for hot, exciting.
Or the 1963 Jaguar: It's actually a crummy car, falls apart all the time, but the owners love it.
And it's beautiful -- it's in the Museum of Modern Art.
A water bottle: You buy it because of the bottle, not because of the water.
And when people are finished, they don't throw it away.
They keep it for -- you know, it's like the old wine bottles, you keep it for decoration or maybe fill it with water again, which proves it's not the water.
It's all about the visceral experience.
The middle level of processing is the behavioral level and that's actually where most of our stuff gets done.
Visceral is subconscious, you're unaware of it.
Behavioral is subconscious, you're unaware of it.
Almost everything we do is subconscious.
I'm walking around the stage -- I'm not attending to the control of my legs.
I'm doing a lot; most of my talk is subconscious; it has been rehearsed and thought about a lot.
Most of what we do is subconscious.
Automatic behavior -- skilled behavior -- is subconscious, controlled by the behavioral side.
And behavioral design is all about feeling in control, which includes usability, understanding -- but also the feel and heft.
That's why the Global knives are so neat.
They're so nicely balanced, so sharp, that you really feel you're in control of the cutting.
Or, just driving a high-performance sports car over a demanding curb -- again, feeling that you are in complete control of the environment.
Or the sensual feeling.
This is a Kohler shower, a waterfall shower, and actually, all those knobs beneath are also showerheads.
It will squirt you all around and you can stay in that shower for hours -- and not waste water, by the way, because it recirculates the same dirty water.
(Laughter) Or this -- this is a really neat teapot I found at high tea at The Four Seasons Hotel in Chicago.
It's a Ronnefeldt tilting teapot.
That's kind of what the teapot looks like but the way you use it is you lay it on its back, and you put tea in, and then you fill it with water.
The water then seeps over the tea.
And the tea is sitting in this stuff to the right -- the tea is to the right of this line.
There's a little ledge inside, so the tea is sitting there and the water is filling it up like that.
And when the tea is ready, or almost ready, you tilt it.
And that means the tea is partially covered while it completes the brewing.
And when it's finished, you put it vertically, and now the tea is -- you remember -- above this line and the water only comes to here -- and so it keeps the tea out.
On top of that, it communicates, which is what emotion does.
Emotion is all about acting; emotion is really about acting.
It's being safe in the world.
Cognition is about understanding the world, emotion is about interpreting it -- saying good, bad, safe, dangerous, and getting us ready to act, which is why the muscles tense or relax.
And that's why we can tell the emotion of somebody else -- because their muscles are acting, subconsciously, except that we've evolved to make the facial muscles really rich with emotion.
Well, this has emotions if you like, because it signals the waiter that, "Hey, I'm finished. See -- upright."
And the waiter can come by and say, "Would you like more water?"
It's kind of neat. What a wonderful design.
And the third level is reflective, which is, if you like the superego, it's a little part of the brain that has no control over what you do, no control over the -- doesn't see the senses, doesn't control the muscles.
It looks over what's going on.
It's that little voice in your head that's watching and saying, "That's good. That's bad."
Or, "Why are you doing that? I don't understand."
It's that little voice in your head that's the seat of consciousness.
Here's a great reflective product.
Owners of the Hummer have said, "You know I've owned many cars in my life -- all sorts of exotic cars, but never have I had a car that attracted so much attention."
It's about attention. It's about their image, not about the car.
If you want a more positive model -- this is the GM car.
And the reason you might buy it now is because you care about the environment.
And you'll buy it to protect the environment, even though the first few cars are going to be really expensive and not perfected.
But that's reflective design as well.
Or an expensive watch, so you can impress people -- "Oh gee, I didn't know you had that watch."
As opposed to this one, which is a pure behavioral watch, which probably keeps better time than the $13,000 watch I just showed you.
This is a clear Don Norman watch.
And what's neat is sometimes you pit one emotion against the other, the visceral fear of falling against the reflective state saying, "It's OK. It's OK. It's safe. It's safe."
If that amusement park were rusty and falling apart, you'd never go on the ride.
So, it's pitting one against the other.
The other neat thing ...
(Laughter) So Jake Cress is this furniture maker, and he makes this unbelievable set of furniture.
And this is his chair with claw, and the poor little chair has lost its ball and it's trying to get it back before anybody notices.
And what's so neat about it is how you accept that story.
And that's what's nice about emotion.
So that's the new me.
I'm only saying positive things from now on.
(Laughter) (Applause)
I've been intrigued by this question of whether we could evolve or develop a sixth sense -- a sense that would give us seamless access and easy access to meta-information or information that may exist somewhere that may be relevant to help us make the right decision about whatever it is that we're coming across.
And some of you may argue, "Well, don't today's cell phones do that already?"
But I would say no.
When you meet someone here at TED -- and this is the top networking place, of course, of the year -- you don't shake somebody's hand and then say, "Can you hold on for a moment while I take out my phone and Google you?"
Or when you go to the supermarket and you're standing there in that huge aisle of different types of toilet papers, you don't take out your cell phone, and open a browser, and go to a website to try to decide which of these different toilet papers is the most ecologically responsible purchase to make.
So we don't really have easy access to all this relevant information that can just help us make optimal decisions about what to do next and what actions to take.
And so my research group at the Media Lab has been developing a series of inventions to give us access to this information in a sort of easy way, without requiring that the user changes any of their behavior.
And I'm here to unveil our latest effort, and most successful effort so far, which is still very much a work in process.
I'm actually wearing the device right now and we've sort of cobbled it together with components that are off the shelf -- and that, by the way, only cost 350 dollars at this point in time.
I'm wearing a camera, just a simple web cam, a portable, battery-powered projection system with a little mirror.
These components communicate to my cell phone in my pocket which acts as the communication and computation device.
And in the video here we see my student Pranav Mistry, who's really the genius who's been implementing and designing this whole system.
And we see how this system lets him walk up to any surface and start using his hands to interact with the information that is projected in front of him.
The system tracks the four significant fingers.
In this case, he's wearing simple marker caps that you may recognize.
But if you want a more stylish version, you could also paint your nails in different colors.
And the camera basically tracks these four fingers and recognizes any gestures that he's making so he can just go to, for example, a map of Long Beach, zoom in and out, etc.
The system also recognizes iconic gestures such as the "take a picture" gesture, and then takes a picture of whatever is in front of you.
And when he then walks back to the Media Lab, he can just go up to any wall and project all the pictures that he's taken, sort through them and organize them, and re-size them, etc., again using all natural gestures.
So, some of you most likely were here two years ago and saw the demo by Jeff Han, or some of you may think, "Well, doesn't this look like the Microsoft Surface Table?"
And yes, you also interact using natural gestures, both hands, etc.
But the difference here is that you can use any surface, you can walk up to any surface, including your hand, if nothing else is available, and interact with this projected data.
The device is completely portable, and can be -- (Applause) (Applause ends) So, one important difference is that it's totally mobile.
Another even more important difference is that in mass production, this would not cost more tomorrow than today's cell phones and would actually not sort of be a bigger packaging -- could look a lot more stylish than this version that I'm wearing around my neck.
But other than letting some of you live out your fantasy of looking as cool as Tom Cruise in "Minority Report," the reason why we're really excited about this device is that it really can act as one of these sixth-sense devices that gives you relevant information about whatever is in front of you.
So we see Pranav here going into the supermarket and he's shopping for some paper towels.
And, as he picks up a product, the system can recognize the product that he's picking up, using either image recognition or marker technology, and give him the green light or an orange light.
He can ask for additional information.
So this particular choice here is a particularly good choice, given his personal criteria.
Some of you may want the toilet paper with the most bleach in it rather than the most ecologically responsible choice.
(Laughter) If he picks up a book in the bookstore, he can get an Amazon rating -- it gets projected right on the cover of the book.
This is Juan's book, our previous speaker, which gets a great rating, by the way, at Amazon.
And so, Pranav turns the page of the book and can then see additional information about the book -- reader comments, maybe sort of information by his favorite critic, etc.
If he turns to a particular page, he finds an annotation by maybe an expert or a friend of ours that gives him a little bit of additional information about whatever is on that particular page.
Reading the newspaper -- it never has to be outdated.
(Laughter) You can get video annotations of the events that you're reading about.
You can get the latest sports scores, etc.
This is a more controversial one.
(Laughter) As you interact with someone at TED, maybe you can see a word cloud of the tags, the words that are associated with that person in their blog and personal web pages.
In this case, the student is interested in cameras, etc.
On your way to the airport, if you pick up your boarding pass, it can tell you that your flight is delayed, that the gate has changed, etc.
And, if you need to know what the current time is, it's as simple as drawing a watch -- (Laughter) (Applause) on your arm.
So that's where we're at so far in developing this sixth sense that would give us seamless access to all this relevant information about the things that we may come across.
My student Pranav, who's really, like I said, the genius behind this.
(Applause and cheering) (Applause ends) He does deserve a lot of applause, because I don't think he's slept much in the last three months, actually.
And his girlfriend is probably not very happy about him either.
But it's not perfect yet, it's very much a work in progress.
And who knows, maybe in another 10 years we'll be here with the ultimate sixth sense brain implant.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was speaking to a group of about 300 kids, ages six to eight, at a children's museum, and I brought with me a bag full of legs, similar to the kinds of things you see up here, and had them laid out on a table for the kids.
And, from my experience, you know, kids are naturally curious about what they don't know, or don't understand, or is foreign to them.
They only learn to be frightened of those differences when an adult influences them to behave that way, and maybe censors that natural curiosity, or you know, reins in the question-asking in the hopes of them being polite little kids.
So I just pictured a first grade teacher out in the lobby with these unruly kids, saying, "Now, whatever you do, don't stare at her legs."
But, of course, that's the point.
That's why I was there, I wanted to invite them to look and explore.
So I made a deal with the adults that the kids could come in without any adults for two minutes on their own.
The doors open, the kids descend on this table of legs, and they are poking and prodding, and they're wiggling toes, and they're trying to put their full weight on the sprinting leg to see what happens with that.
And I said, "Kids, really quickly -- I woke up this morning, I decided I wanted to be able to jump over a house -- nothing too big, two or three stories -- but, if you could think of any animal, any superhero, any cartoon character, anything you can dream up right now, what kind of legs would you build me?"
And immediately a voice shouted, "Kangaroo!"
"No, no, no! Should be a frog!"
"No. It should be Go Go Gadget!"
"No, no, no! It should be the Incredibles."
And other things that I don't -- aren't familiar with.
And then, one eight-year-old said, "Hey, why wouldn't you want to fly too?"
And the whole room, including me, was like, "Yeah."
(Laughter) And just like that, I went from being a woman that these kids would have been trained to see as "disabled" to somebody that had potential that their bodies didn't have yet.
Somebody that might even be super-abled.
Interesting.
So some of you actually saw me at TED, 11 years ago.
And there's been a lot of talk about how life-changing this conference is for both speakers and attendees, and I am no exception.
TED literally was the launch pad to the next decade of my life's exploration.
At the time, the legs I presented were groundbreaking in prosthetics.
I had woven carbon fiber sprinting legs modeled after the hind leg of a cheetah, which you may have seen on stage yesterday.
And also these very life-like, intrinsically painted silicone legs.
So at the time, it was my opportunity to put a call out to innovators outside the traditional medical prosthetic community to come bring their talent to the science and to the art of building legs.
So that we can stop compartmentalizing form, function and aesthetic, and assigning them different values.
Well, lucky for me, a lot of people answered that call.
And the journey started, funny enough, with a TED conference attendee -- Chee Pearlman, who hopefully is in the audience somewhere today.
She was the editor then of a magazine called ID, and she gave me a cover story.
This started an incredible journey.
Curious encounters were happening to me at the time; I'd been accepting numerous invitations to speak on the design of the cheetah legs around the world.
And people would come up to me after the conference, after my talk, men and women.
And the conversation would go something like this, "You know Aimee, you're very attractive.
You don't look disabled."
(Laughter) I thought, "Well, that's amazing, because I don't feel disabled."
And it really opened my eyes to this conversation that could be explored, about beauty.
What does a beautiful woman have to look like?
What is a sexy body?
And interestingly, from an identity standpoint, what does it mean to have a disability?
I mean, people -- Pamela Anderson has more prosthetic in her body than I do.
Nobody calls her disabled.
(Laughter) So this magazine, through the hands of graphic designer Peter Saville, went to fashion designer Alexander McQueen, and photographer Nick Knight, who were also interested in exploring that conversation.
So, three months after TED I found myself on a plane to London, doing my first fashion shoot, which resulted in this cover -- "Fashion-able"?
Three months after that, I did my first runway show for Alexander McQueen on a pair of hand-carved wooden legs made from solid ash.
Nobody knew -- everyone thought they were wooden boots.
Actually, I have them on stage with me: grapevines, magnolias -- truly stunning.
Poetry matters.
Poetry is what elevates the banal and neglected object to a realm of art.
It can transform the thing that might have made people fearful into something that invites them to look, and look a little longer, and maybe even understand.
I learned this firsthand with my next adventure.
The artist Matthew Barney, in his film opus called the "The Cremaster Cycle."
This is where it really hit home for me -- that my legs could be wearable sculpture.
And even at this point, I started to move away from the need to replicate human-ness as the only aesthetic ideal.
So we made what people lovingly referred to as glass legs even though they're actually optically clear polyurethane, a.k.a. bowling ball material.
Heavy!
Then we made these legs that are cast in soil with a potato root system growing in them, and beetroots out the top, and a very lovely brass toe.
That's a good close-up of that one.
Then another character was a half-woman, half-cheetah -- a little homage to my life as an athlete.
14 hours of prosthetic make-up to get into a creature that had articulated paws, claws and a tail that whipped around, like a gecko.
(Laughter) And then another pair of legs we collaborated on were these -- look like jellyfish legs, also polyurethane.
And the only purpose that these legs can serve, outside the context of the film, is to provoke the senses and ignite the imagination.
So whimsy matters.
Today, I have over a dozen pair of prosthetic legs that various people have made for me, and with them I have different negotiations of the terrain under my feet, and I can change my height -- I have a variable of five different heights.
(Laughter) Today, I'm 6'1".
And I had these legs made a little over a year ago at Dorset Orthopedic in England and when I brought them home to Manhattan, my first night out on the town, I went to a very fancy party.
And a girl was there who has known me for years at my normal 5'8".
Her mouth dropped open when she saw me, and she went, "But you're so tall!"
And I said, "I know. Isn't it fun?"
I mean, it's a little bit like wearing stilts on stilts, but I have an entirely new relationship to door jams that I never expected I would ever have.
And I was having fun with it.
And she looked at me, and she said, "But, Aimee, that's not fair."
(Laughter) (Applause) And the incredible thing was she really meant it.
It's not fair that you can change your height, as you want it.
And that's when I knew -- that's when I knew that the conversation with society has changed profoundly in this last decade.
It is no longer a conversation about overcoming deficiency.
It's a conversation about augmentation.
It's a conversation about potential.
A prosthetic limb doesn't represent the need to replace loss anymore.
It can stand as a symbol that the wearer has the power to create whatever it is that they want to create in that space.
So people that society once considered to be disabled can now become the architects of their own identities and indeed continue to change those identities by designing their bodies from a place of empowerment.
And what is exciting to me so much right now is that by combining cutting-edge technology -- robotics, bionics -- with the age-old poetry, we are moving closer to understanding our collective humanity.
I think that if we want to discover the full potential in our humanity, we need to celebrate those heartbreaking strengths and those glorious disabilities that we all have.
I think of Shakespeare's Shylock: "If you prick us, do we not bleed, and if you tickle us, do we not laugh?"
It is our humanity, and all the potential within it, that makes us beautiful.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In 1943 Allied aircraft swooped over Nazi Germany, raining tens of thousands of leaflets on people below.
Written by anonymous Germans, the leaflets urged readers to renounce Hitler, to fight furiously for the future and to never give up hope.
Their call to action rippled through homes and businesses and news of their message even reached concentration camps and prisons.
It was only after the war had ended that the authors identities, stories, and tragic fate would come to light.
When Hitler seized power 10 years earlier, Hans and Sophie Scholl were teenagers in the town of Forchtenberg.
At that time, fear, propaganda, and surveillance kept all aspects of life for the Scholl family and millions of other Germans under Nazi control.
The government specifically targeted young people, setting up institutions to regulate their behavior and police their thoughts.
As teenagers, Hans was a member of the Hitler Youth and Sophie joined The League of German Girls.
Hans rose through the ranks and oversaw the training and indoctrination of other young people.
In 1936, he was chosen to carry the flag at a national rally.
But when he witnessed the zeal of Nazi rhetoric, he began to question it for the first time.
Meanwhile, Sophie was also starting to doubt the information she was being fed.
Their parents Robert and Magdalena, who had feared they were losing their children to Nazi ideology, encouraged these misgivings.
At home, Robert and Magdalena listened to foreign radio stations that the government first discouraged and later banned.
While the government churned out national broadcasts which denied Nazi atrocities, the Scholls learned shocking truths.
And yet, they were still subject to the rules of life in Hitlers Germany.
After the outbreak of war, Sophie reluctantly worked for the national effort, and Hans had to take on army duties while attending medical school in Munich.
That was where Hans met Christoph Probst, Willi Graf and Alexander Schmorell.
Day by day, each grew more sickened by Nazi ideology.
They longed to share their views.
But how could they spread them, when it was impossible to know who to trust?
And so, the friends decided to rebel anonymously.
They pooled their money and bought printing materials.
An acquaintance let them use a cellar under his studio.
In secret, they began drafting their message.
In June 1942, mysterious anti-Nazi leaflets began appearing all over Munich.
They were signed: the White Rose.
The first leaflet denounced Hitler and called for Germans to sabotage the war effort: Adopt passive resistance block the functioning of this atheistic war machine before it is too late, before the last city is a heap of rubble before the last youth of our nation bleeds to death...
Dont forget that each people gets the government it deserves! At a time when a sarcastic remark could constitute treason, this language was unprecedented.
It was written mostly by Hans Scholl.
In 1942, Sophie came to Munich knowing nothing of her brothers activities.
She soon encountered the leaflets at school.
But it was not until she discovered evidence in Hans room that she realized whod written them.
Her shock soon gave way to resolve: she wanted in.
For both siblings, it was time to escalate the fury that had been brewing for years.
From June 1942 to February 1943, the group worked feverishly.
While the Gestapo searched for leads, the White Rose were constantly on guard.
The war raged on. Regulations tightened, and Munich suffered air raids.
But the White Rose ventured deeper into conspiracy.
They graffitied buildings and braved trains swarming with Gestapo.
In the winter of 1942, Hans made a treacherous journey to the Czechoslovakian border to meet anti-Nazi rebels.
On February 18, 1943, Sophie and Hans brought a suitcase of leaflets to their university.
A custodian noticed what they were doing and reported them to the Gestapo.
Both calmly denied any involvement until the police gathered all the leaflets and placed them back in the empty case, where they fit perfectly.
When Hans and Sophie confessed, they were immediately led to court and sentenced to death by guillotine.
Despite a grueling interrogation, the two refused to betray their co-conspirators.
Before her execution, Sophie declared her fury at the state of her country.
But she also spoke to a more hopeful future: How can we expect righteousness to prevail when there is hardly anyone willing to give himself up individually to a righteous cause?
Such a fine, sunny day, and I have to go, but what does my death matter, if through us, thousands of people are awakened and stirred to action?
It begins with a countdown.
On August 14th, 1947, a woman in Bombay goes into labor as the clock ticks towards midnight.
Across India, people hold their breath for the declaration of independence after nearly two centuries of British occupation and rule.
And at the stroke of midnight, a squirming infant and two new nations are born in perfect synchronicity.
These events form the foundation of "Midnights Children," a dazzling novel by the British-Indian author Salman Rushdie.
The baby who is the exact same age as the nation is Saleem Sinai, the novels protagonist.
His narrative stretches over 30 years of his life, jumping backwards and forwards in time to speculate on family secrets and deep-seated mysteries.
These include the greatest enigma of all: Saleem has magic powers, and theyre somehow related to the time of his birth.
And hes not the only one.
All children born in and around the stroke of midnight are imbued with extraordinary powers; like Parvati the Witch, a spectacular conjurer; and Saleems nemesis Shiva, a gifted warrior.
With his powers of telepathy, Saleem forges connections with a vast network of the children of midnight including a figure who can step through time and mirrors, a child who changes their gender when immersed in water, and multilingual conjoined twins.
Saleem acts as a delightful guide to magical happenings and historical context alike.
Although his birthday is a day of celebration, it also marks a turbulent period in Indian history.
In 1948, the leader of the Indian independence movement, Mahatma Gandhi, was assassinated.
Independence also coincided with Partition, which divided British-controlled India into the two nations of India and Pakistan.
This contributed to the outbreak of the Indo-Pakistani Wars in 1965 and 1971.
Saleem touches on all this and more, tracing the establishment of Bangladesh in 1971 and the emergency rule of Indira Gandhi.
This vast historical frame is one reason why "Midnights Children" is considered one of the most illuminating works of postcolonial literature ever written.
This genre typically addresses the experience of people living in colonized and formerly colonized countries, and explores the fallout through themes like revolution, migration, and identity.
Rushdie, who like Saleem was born in 1947, was educated in India and Britain, and is renowned for his cross-continental histories, political commentary, and magical realism.
He enriches "Midnights Children" with a plethora of Indian and Pakistani cultural references, from family traditions to food, religion and folktales.
Scribbling by night under the watchful eyes of his lover Padma, Saleems frame narrative echoes that of "1001 Nights," where a woman named Scheherazade tells her king a series of stories to keep herself alive.
And as Saleem sees it, 1001 is the number of night, of magic, of alternative realities. Over the course of the novel, Rushdie dazzles us with multiple versions of reality.
Sometimes, this is like reading a rollercoaster.
Saleem narrates: Who what am I? My answer: I am everyone everything whose being-in- the-world affected was affected by mine.
I am anything that happens after Ive gone which would not have happened if I had not come.
Nor am I particularly exceptional in this matter; each 'I,' every one of the now-six- hundred-million-plus of us, contains a similar multitude.
I repeat for the last time: to understand me, youll have to swallow a world. Saleems narrative often has a breathless quality and even as Rushdie depicts the cosmological consequences of a life, he questions the idea that we can ever condense history into a single narrative.
His mind-bending plot and shapeshifting characters have garnered continuing fascination and praise.
Not only did "Midnights Children" win the prestigious Man Booker Prize in its year of publication, but in a 2008 competition that pitted all 39 winners against each other, it was named the best of all the winners.
In a masterpiece of epic proportions, Rushdie reveals that there are no singular truths rather, its wiser to believe in several versions of reality at once, hold many lives in the palms of our hands, and experience multiple moments in a single stroke of the clock.
On their 20th birthday, identical twin astronauts volunteer for an experiment.
Terra will remain on Earth, while Stella will board a spaceship.
Stellas ship will travel at 86.6% the speed of light to visit a star that is 10 light-years away, then return to Earth at the same speed.
As they prepare to part ways, the twins wonder what will happen when theyre reunited.
Since a light year is exactly the distance light can travel in a year, Stellas journey should take 23 years.
But from having studied special relativity, the twins know its not that simple.
First of all, the faster an object moves through space, the slower it moves through time compared to an unmoving observer.
This relationship can be quantified with something called the Lorentz factor, which is defined by this equation.
And secondly, the length of a moving object as measured by an observer at rest will contract by the same factor.
At 86.6% of the speed of light the Lorentz factor is 2, meaning time will pass twice as slowly aboard the spaceship.
Of course, Stella wont notice time slowing down.
Thats because all time-based processes in the ship will slow down as well clocks and electrical devices; Stellas biological activities including her rate of aging and her perception of time itself.
The only people who could notice time on the moving spaceship passing slower for Stella would be observers in an inertial, or non-accelerating, reference frame like Terra back on Earth.
Thus, Terra concludes that when they meet back on Earth, shell be older than Stella.
But thats just one way of looking at things.
Because all movement is relative, Stella argues it would be just as valid to say her spaceship will stand still while the rest of the universe, including Terra, moves around her.
And in that case, time will pass twice as slowly for Terra, making Stella the older twin in the end.
They cant each be older than the other, so which one of them is right?
This apparent contradiction is known as the Twin Paradox. But its not really a paradox just an example of how special relativity can be easily misunderstood.
To test their theories in real-time, each of the twins agrees to send a burst of light to the other every time a year has passed for them.
Unlike other objects, the speed of light is always constant regardless of an observers reference frame.
A light burst sent from Earth will be measured at the same speed as a light burst sent from the spaceship, regardless of whether its on its outbound or return trip.
So when one twin observes a burst of light, theyre measuring how long it took the other twin to experience a year passing, plus how long it took for light to travel between them.
We can track whats happening on a graph.
The X axis marks distance from Earth, and the Y axis tracks the passage of time.
From Terras perspective, her path will simply be a vertical line, with distance equal to zero and each tick on the line equivalent to a year as she perceives it.
Stellas path will stretch from the same origin to a point 11.5 years in time and 10 light-years in distance from Terra before converging again at zero distance and 23 years time.
At her first one-year mark, Terra will send a pulse of light from Earth towards Stellas spaceship.
Since light takes a year to travel one light-year, its path will be a 45-degree diagonal line.
And because Stella is traveling away from it, by the time the light catches up to her, over 7 total years will have passed for Terra, and over 4 for Stella.
By the time Stella observes Terras second burst, she will already be on her return journey.
But now, since shes moving towards the source of the light, it will take less time to reach her, and shell observe the bursts more frequently.
This means that Stella observes Terra aging slowly for the first half of her journey, but aging rapidly during the return half.
Meanwhile for Stella, it seems as though Terra, the destination star, and the whole universe are moving around her.
And because of length contraction, Stella observes the distance between them shrinking by a factor of 2.
This means each leg of the trip will only take about six years from Stellas perspective.
When she sends the first signal to Earth, two years will have passed for Terra.
Stella will send four more light bursts during her outbound journey, each one from farther away.
By the time Terra observes the first pulse from Stella's inbound journey, over 21 years will have passed for her.
For the rest of Stella's return home, Terra receives multiple light bursts each year.
Thus, Terra observes Stella aging slowly for about 90% of their 23 years apart, and aging rapidly during the last 10%.
This asymmetry accounts for why the paradox isnt really a paradox.
Although each twin witnesses time both speeding up and slowing down for the other, Stella sees an even split, while Terra sees Stella aging slowly for most of the time theyre apart.
This is consistent with each twins measurement of the space voyage, which takes 23 Earth years, but only 11.5 as experienced aboard the ship.
When the twins are reunited, Terra will be 43 years old, while Stella will be 31.
Where Stella went wrong was her assumption that she and Terra had equal claim to being inertial observers.
To be an inertial observer, one has to maintain a constant speed and direction relative to the rest of the universe.
Terra was at rest the entire time, so her velocity was a constant zero.
But when Stella changed her direction for the return journey, she entered a different reference frame from the one shed started in.
Terra and Stella now both have a better understanding of how spacetime works.
And as twins who are eleven years apart in age, theyre a perfect example of special relativity.
The attacking infantry advances steadily, their elephants already having broken the defensive line.
The king tries to retreat, but enemy cavalry flanks him from the rear.
Escape is impossible.
But this isnt a real war nor is it just a game.
Over the roughly one-and-a-half millennia of its existence, chess has been known as a tool of military strategy, a metaphor for human affairs, and a benchmark of genius.
While our earliest records of chess are in the 7th century, legend tells that the games origins lie a century earlier.
Supposedly, when the youngest prince of the Gupta Empire was killed in battle, his brother devised a way of representing the scene to their grieving mother.
Set on the 8x8 ashtapada board used for other popular pastimes, a new game emerged with two key features: different rules for moving different types of pieces, and a single king piece whose fate determined the outcome.
The game was originally known as chaturanga a Sanskrit word for "four divisions."
But with its spread to Sassanid Persia, it acquired its current name and terminology "chess," derived from "shah," meaning king, and checkmate from "shah mat," or the king is helpless. After the 7th century Islamic conquest of Persia, chess was introduced to the Arab world.
Transcending its role as a tactical simulation, it eventually became a rich source of poetic imagery.
Diplomats and courtiers used chess terms to describe political power.
Ruling caliphs became avid players themselves.
And historian al-Masudi considered the game a testament to human free will compared to games of chance.
Medieval trade along the Silk Road carried the game to East and Southeast Asia, where many local variants developed.
In China, chess pieces were placed at intersections of board squares rather than inside them, as in the native strategy game Go.
The reign of Mongol leader Tamerlane saw an 11x10 board with safe squares called citadels.
And in Japanese shogi, captured pieces could be used by the opposing player.
But it was in Europe that chess began to take on its modern form.
By 1000 AD, the game had become part of courtly education.
Chess was used as an allegory for different social classes performing their proper roles, and the pieces were re-interpreted in their new context.
At the same time, the Church remained suspicious of games.
Moralists cautioned against devoting too much time to them, with chess even being briefly banned in France.
Yet the game proliferated, and the 15th century saw it cohering into the form we know today.
The relatively weak piece of advisor was recast as the more powerful queen perhaps inspired by the recent surge of strong female leaders.
This change accelerated the games pace, and as other rules were popularized, treatises analyzing common openings and endgames appeared.
Chess theory was born.
With the Enlightenment era, the game moved from royal courts to coffeehouses.
Chess was now seen as an expression of creativity, encouraging bold moves and dramatic plays.
This "Romantic" style reached its peak in the Immortal Game of 1851, where Adolf Anderssen managed a checkmate after sacrificing his queen and both rooks.
But the emergence of formal competitive play in the late 19th century meant that strategic calculation would eventually trump dramatic flair.
And with the rise of international competition, chess took on a new geopolitical importance.
During the Cold War, the Soviet Union devoted great resources to cultivating chess talent, dominating the championships for the rest of the century.
But the player who would truly upset Russian dominance was not a citizen of another country but an IBM computer called Deep Blue.
Chess-playing computers had been developed for decades, but Deep Blues triumph over Garry Kasparov in 1997 was the first time a machine had defeated a sitting champion.
Today, chess software is capable of consistently defeating the best human players.
But just like the game theyve mastered, these machines are products of human ingenuity.
And perhaps that same ingenuity will guide us out of this apparent checkmate.
As the sun rises on a fall morning in 55 BCE, Camma lays two pigeons on the altar at the center of her village.
She offers a prayer to Matrona mother goddess of the Earth, and Lugus chief of the gods.
Then, she wrings the birds necks and cuts them open to examine their entrails for divine messages.
Camma is a druid.
This means she conducts religious rites, but she also serves as a judge, healer, and scholar, teaching children and mediating conflict between Celtic tribes.
She began her studies as a child, memorizing the countless details necessary to perform her many roles, since the druids knowledge is considered too sacred to record in writing.
Like many druids, she spent years studying in Britain.
Now, she is a resident Druid of the Veneti tribe in a small farming village near the western coast of Gaul, in what is now France.
Since returning to Gaul, she has received many offers of marriage but she has decided to devote herself to her work, at least for now.
This morning, the omens are troubling.
They tell of war and strife, as they often have in recent months.
A neighboring tribe, the Redones, have raided their village and stolen cattle in broad daylight twice this fall.
The children have gathered around to watch her work.
Camma plays her lyre and sings to them.
She weaves stories of the powerful kings who once ruled their land  brave warriors who were slain naked in combat but who will be reborn, as will all the Celts.
When the children go off to help in the fields, Camma heads across the village to visit an old woman with an eye infection.
On the way to the old womans hut, she passes men salting pigs for the winter food supply and women weaving clothing from dyed wool.
She delivers a remedy for the injured eye its made from mistletoe, a sacred healing plant, but deadly if used incorrectly.
From there, Camma visits the chieftain to discuss the omens.
She convinces him to go and talk through their problems with their neighbors.
Accompanied by several warriors, they head through the forest and demand a meeting outside the Redones village walls.
The Redones representatives bring their own druid, who Camma recognizes from the annual gathering in central Gaul where head druids are elected.
The chieftains immediately begin to argue and threaten each other.
Camma steps between the opposing sides to stop them from fighting they must honor her authority.
Finally, the Redones agree to pay Cammas tribe several cattle.
In spite of this resolution, Camma still feels uneasy on the long walk home.
As they approach the village walls, a bright streak shoots across the sky another omen, but of what?
Back home, Camma sits among the elders for her evening meal of porridge, a bit of meat, and a cup of wine.
While they were out during the day, an intercepted parchment arrived.
Camma recognizes the writing immediately.
Although the druids are forbidden from recording their knowledge, she and many other young druids can read Latin.
From the message, she learns that the Romans are drawing closer to their lands.
Some of the elders say that the tribe should flee to the nearby hills and hide, but Camma counsels them to trust in the gods and remain in their home.
Privately, she has her doubts.
Should the Romans reach them, her power to help might be limited.
Unlike the other Celtic tribes, Roman legions have no regard for the druids sacred role as peacemakers.
Before going to bed, she observes the course of the planets and consults her charts, trying to make sense of the meteor she saw earlier.
The signs are converging on a larger threat than their neighbors.
So, here we go: a flyby of play.
It's got to be serious if the New York Times puts a cover story of their February 17th Sunday magazine about play.
At the bottom of this, it says, "It's deeper than gender.
Seriously, but dangerously fun.
And a sandbox for new ideas about evolution."
Not bad, except if you look at that cover, what's missing?
You see any adults?
Well, lets go back to the 15th century.
This is a courtyard in Europe, and a mixture of 124 different kinds of play.
All ages, solo play, body play, games, taunting.
And there it is. And I think this is a typical picture of what it was like in a courtyard then.
I think we may have lost something in our culture.
So I'm gonna take you through what I think is a remarkable sequence.
North of Churchill, Manitoba, in October and November, there's no ice on Hudson Bay.
And this polar bear that you see, this 1200-pound male, he's wild and fairly hungry.
And Norbert Rosing, a German photographer, is there on scene, making a series of photos of these huskies, who are tethered.
And from out of stage left comes this wild, male polar bear, with a predatory gaze.
Any of you who've been to Africa or had a junkyard dog come after you, there is a fixed kind of predatory gaze that you know you're in trouble.
But on the other side of that predatory gaze is a female husky in a play bow, wagging her tail.
And something very unusual happens.
That fixed behavior -- which is rigid and stereotyped and ends up with a meal -- changes.
And this polar bear stands over the husky, no claws extended, no fangs taking a look.
And they begin an incredible ballet.
A play ballet.
This is in nature: it overrides a carnivorous nature and what otherwise would have been a short fight to the death.
And if you'll begin to look closely at the husky that's bearing her throat to the polar bear, and look a little more closely, they're in an altered state.
They're in a state of play.
And it's that state that allows these two creatures to explore the possible.
They are beginning to do something that neither would have done without the play signals.
And it is a marvelous example of how a differential in power can be overridden by a process of nature that's within all of us.
Now how did I get involved in this?
John mentioned that I've done some work with murderers, and I have.
The Texas Tower murderer opened my eyes, in retrospect, when we studied his tragic mass murder, to the importance of play, in that that individual, by deep study, was found to have severe play deprivation.
Charles Whitman was his name.
And our committee, which consisted of a lot of hard scientists, did feel at the end of that study that the absence of play and a progressive suppression of developmentally normal play led him to be more vulnerable to the tragedy that he perpetrated.
And that finding has stood the test of time -- unfortunately even into more recent times, at Virginia Tech.
And other studies of populations at risk sensitized me to the importance of play, but I didn't really understand what it was.
And it was many years in taking play histories of individuals before I really began to recognize that I didn't really have a full understanding of it.
And I don't think any of us has a full understanding of it, by any means.
But there are ways of looking at it that I think can give you -- give us all a taxonomy, a way of thinking about it.
And this image is, for humans, the beginning point of play.
When that mother and infant lock eyes, and the infant's old enough to have a social smile, what happens -- spontaneously -- is the eruption of joy on the part of the mother.
And she begins to babble and coo and smile, and so does the baby.
If we've got them wired up with an electroencephalogram, the right brain of each of them becomes attuned, so that the joyful emergence of this earliest of play scenes and the physiology of that is something we're beginning to get a handle on.
And I'd like you to think that every bit of more complex play builds on this base for us humans.
And so now I'm going to take you through sort of a way of looking at play, but it's never just singularly one thing.
We're going to look at body play, which is a spontaneous desire to get ourselves out of gravity.
This is a mountain goat.
If you're having a bad day, try this: jump up and down, wiggle around -- you're going to feel better.
And you may feel like this character, who is also just doing it for its own sake.
It doesn't have a particular purpose, and that's what's great about play.
If its purpose is more important than the act of doing it, it's probably not play.
And there's a whole other type of play, which is object play.
And this Japanese macaque has made a snowball, and he or she's going to roll down a hill.
And -- they don't throw it at each other, but this is a fundamental part of being playful.
The human hand, in manipulation of objects, is the hand in search of a brain; the brain is in search of a hand; and play is the medium by which those two are linked in the best way.
JPL we heard this morning -- JPL is an incredible place.
They have located two consultants, Frank Wilson and Nate Johnson, who are -- Frank Wilson is a neurologist, Nate Johnson is a mechanic.
He taught mechanics in a high school in Long Beach, and found that his students were no longer able to solve problems.
And he tried to figure out why. And he came to the conclusion, quite on his own, that the students who could no longer solve problems, such as fixing cars, hadn't worked with their hands.
Frank Wilson had written a book called "The Hand."
They got together -- JPL hired them.
Now JPL, NASA and Boeing, before they will hire a research and development problem solver -- even if they're summa cum laude from Harvard or Cal Tech -- if they haven't fixed cars, haven't done stuff with their hands early in life, played with their hands, they can't problem-solve as well.
So play is practical, and it's very important.
Now one of the things about play is that it is born by curiosity and exploration. (Laughter) But it has to be safe exploration.
This happens to be OK -- he's an anatomically interested little boy and that's his mom. Other situations wouldn't be quite so good.
But curiosity, exploration, are part of the play scene.
If you want to belong, you need social play.
And social play is part of what we're about here today, and is a byproduct of the play scene.
Rough and tumble play.
These lionesses, seen from a distance, looked like they were fighting.
But if you look closely, they're kind of like the polar bear and husky: no claws, flat fur, soft eyes, open mouth with no fangs, balletic movements, curvilinear movements -- all specific to play.
And rough-and-tumble play is a great learning medium for all of us.
Preschool kids, for example, should be allowed to dive, hit, whistle, scream, be chaotic, and develop through that a lot of emotional regulation and a lot of the other social byproducts -- cognitive, emotional and physical -- that come as a part of rough and tumble play.
Spectator play, ritual play -- we're involved in some of that.
Those of you who are from Boston know that this was the moment -- rare -- where the Red Sox won the World Series.
But take a look at the face and the body language of everybody in this fuzzy picture, and you can get a sense that they're all at play.
Imaginative play.
I love this picture because my daughter, who's now almost 40, is in this picture, but it reminds me of her storytelling and her imagination, her ability to spin yarns at this age -- preschool.
A really important part of being a player is imaginative solo play.
And I love this one, because it's also what we're about.
We all have an internal narrative that's our own inner story.
The unit of intelligibility of most of our brains is the story.
I'm telling you a story today about play.
Well, this bushman, I think, is talking about the fish that got away that was that long, but it's a fundamental part of the play scene.
So what does play do for the brain?
Well, a lot.
We don't know a whole lot about what it does for the human brain, because funding has not been exactly heavy for research on play.
I walked into the Carnegie asking for a grant.
They'd given me a large grant when I was an academician for the study of felony drunken drivers, and I thought I had a pretty good track record, and by the time I had spent half an hour talking about play, it was obvious that they were not -- did not feel that play was serious.
I think that -- that's a few years back -- I think that wave is past, and the play wave is cresting, because there is some good science.
Nothing lights up the brain like play.
Three-dimensional play fires up the cerebellum, puts a lot of impulses into the frontal lobe -- the executive portion -- helps contextual memory be developed, and -- and, and, and.
So it's -- for me, its been an extremely nourishing scholarly adventure to look at the neuroscience that's associated with play, and to bring together people who in their individual disciplines hadn't really thought of it that way.
And that's part of what the National Institute for Play is all about.
And this is one of the ways you can study play -- is to get a 256-lead electroencephalogram.
I'm sorry I don't have a playful-looking subject, but it allows mobility, which has limited the actual study of play.
And we've got a mother-infant play scenario that we're hoping to complete underway at the moment.
The reason I put this here is also to queue up my thoughts about objectifying what play does.
The animal world has objectified it.
In the animal world, if you take rats, who are hardwired to play at a certain period of their juvenile years and you suppress play -- they squeak, they wrestle, they pin each other, that's part of their play.
If you stop that behavior on one group that you're experimenting with, and you allow it in another group that you're experimenting with, and then you present those rats with a cat odor-saturated collar, they're hardwired to flee and hide.
Pretty smart -- they don't want to get killed by a cat.
So what happens?
They both hide out.
The non-players never come out -- they die.
The players slowly explore the environment, and begin again to test things out.
That says to me, at least in rats -- and I think they have the same neurotransmitters that we do and a similar cortical architecture -- that play may be pretty important for our survival.
And, and, and -- there are a lot more animal studies that I could talk about.
Now, this is a consequence of play deprivation. (Laughter) This took a long time -- I had to get Homer down and put him through the fMRI and the SPECT and multiple EEGs, but as a couch potato, his brain has shrunk.
And we do know that in domestic animals and others, when they're play deprived, they don't -- and rats also -- they don't develop a brain that is normal.
Now, the program says that the opposite of play is not work, it's depression.
And I think if you think about life without play -- no humor, no flirtation, no movies, no games, no fantasy and, and, and.
Try and imagine a culture or a life, adult or otherwise without play.
And the thing that's so unique about our species is that we're really designed to play through our whole lifetime.
And we all have capacity to play signal.
Nobody misses that dog I took a picture of on a Carmel beach a couple of weeks ago.
What's going to follow from that behavior is play.
And you can trust it.
The basis of human trust is established through play signals.
And we begin to lose those signals, culturally and otherwise, as adults.
That's a shame.
I think we've got a lot of learning to do.
Now, Jane Goodall has here a play face along with one of her favorite chimps.
So part of the signaling system of play has to do with vocal, facial, body, gestural.
You know, you can tell -- and I think when we're getting into collective play, its really important for groups to gain a sense of safety through their own sharing of play signals.
You may not know this word, but it should be your biological first name and last name.
Because neoteny means the retention of immature qualities into adulthood.
And we are, by physical anthropologists, by many, many studies, the most neotenous, the most youthful, the most flexible, the most plastic of all creatures.
And therefore, the most playful.
And this gives us a leg up on adaptability.
Now, there is a way of looking at play that I also want to emphasize here, which is the play history.
Your own personal play history is unique, and often is not something we think about particularly.
This is a book written by a consummate player by the name of Kevin Carroll.
Kevin Carroll came from extremely deprived circumstances: alcoholic mother, absent father, inner-city Philadelphia, black, had to take care of a younger brother.
Found that when he looked at a playground out of a window into which he had been confined, he felt something different.
And so he followed up on it.
And his life -- the transformation of his life from deprivation and what one would expect -- potentially prison or death -- he become a linguist, a trainer for the 76ers and now is a motivational speaker.
And he gives play as a transformative force over his entire life.
Now there's another play history that I think is a work in progress.
Those of you who remember Al Gore, during the first term and then during his successful but unelected run for the presidency, may remember him as being kind of wooden and not entirely his own person, at least in public.
And looking at his history, which is common in the press, it seems to me, at least -- looking at it from a shrink's point of view -- that a lot of his life was programmed.
Summers were hard, hard work, in the heat of Tennessee summers.
He had the expectations of his senatorial father and Washington, D.C.
And although I think he certainly had the capacity for play -- because I do know something about that -- he wasn't as empowered, I think, as he now is by paying attention to what is his own passion and his own inner drive, which I think has its basis in all of us in our play history.
So what I would encourage on an individual level to do, is to explore backwards as far as you can go to the most clear, joyful, playful image that you have, whether it's with a toy, on a birthday or on a vacation.
And begin to build to build from the emotion of that into how that connects with your life now.
And you'll find, you may change jobs -- which has happened to a number people when I've had them do this -- in order to be more empowered through their play.
Or you'll be able to enrich your life by prioritizing it and paying attention to it.
Most of us work with groups, and I put this up because the d.school, the design school at Stanford, thanks to David Kelley and a lot of others who have been visionary about its establishment, has allowed a group of us to get together and create a course called "From Play to Innovation."
And you'll see this course is to investigate the human state of play, which is kind of like the polar bear-husky state and its importance to creative thinking: "to explore play behavior, its development and its biological basis; to apply those principles, through design thinking, to promote innovation in the corporate world; and the students will work with real-world partners on design projects with widespread application."
This is our maiden voyage in this.
We're about two and a half, three months into it, and it's really been fun.
There is our star pupil, this labrador, who taught a lot of us what a state of play is, and an extremely aged and decrepit professor in charge there.
And Brendan Boyle, Rich Crandall -- and on the far right is, I think, a person who will be in cahoots with George Smoot for a Nobel Prize -- Stuart Thompson, in neuroscience.
So we've had Brendan, who's from IDEO, and the rest of us sitting aside and watching these students as they put play principles into practice in the classroom.
And one of their projects was to see what makes meetings boring, and to try and do something about it.
So what will follow is a student-made film about just that.
Narrator: Flow is the mental state of apparition in which the person is fully immersed in what he or she is doing.
Characterized by a feeling of energized focus, full involvement and success in the process of the activity.
An important key insight that we learned about meetings is that people pack them in one after another, disruptive to the day.
Attendees at meetings don't know when they'll get back to the task that they left at their desk.
But it doesn't have to be that way.
(Music) Some sage and repeatedly furry monks at this place called the d.school designed a meeting that you can literally step out of when it's over.
Take the meeting off, and have peace of mind that you can come back to me.
Because when you need it again, the meeting is literally hanging in your closet.
The Wearable Meeting.
Because when you put it on, you immediately get everything you need to have a fun and productive and useful meeting.
But when you take it off -- that's when the real action happens.
(Music) (Laughter) (Applause) Stuart Brown: So I would encourage you all to engage not in the work-play differential -- where you set aside time to play -- but where your life becomes infused minute by minute, hour by hour, with body, object, social, fantasy, transformational kinds of play.
And I think you'll have a better and more empowered life.
Thank You.
(Applause) John Hockenberry: So it sounds to me like what you're saying is that there may be some temptation on the part of people to look at your work and go -- I think I've heard this, in my kind of pop psychological understanding of play, that somehow, the way animals and humans deal with play, is that it's some sort of rehearsal for adult activity.
Your work seems to suggest that that is powerfully wrong.
SB: Yeah, I don't think that's accurate, and I think probably because animals have taught us that.
If you stop a cat from playing -- which you can do, and we've all seen how cats bat around stuff -- they're just as good predators as they would be if they hadn't played.
And if you imagine a kid pretending to be King Kong, or a race car driver, or a fireman, they don't all become race car drivers or firemen, you know.
So there's a disconnect between preparation for the future -- which is what most people are comfortable in thinking about play as -- and thinking of it as a separate biological entity.
And this is where my chasing animals for four, five years really changed my perspective from a clinician to what I am now, which is that play has a biological place, just like sleep and dreams do.
And if you look at sleep and dreams biologically, animals sleep and dream, and they rehearse and they do some other things that help memory and that are a very important part of sleep and dreams.
The next step of evolution in mammals and creatures with divinely superfluous neurons will be to play.
And the fact that the polar bear and husky or magpie and a bear or you and I and our dogs can crossover and have that experience sets play aside as something separate.
And its hugely important in learning and crafting the brain.
So it's not just something you do in your spare time.
JH: How do you keep -- and I know you're part of the scientific research community, and you have to justify your existence with grants and proposals like everyone else -- how do you prevent -- and some of the data that you've produced, the good science that you're talking about you've produced, is hot to handle.
How do you prevent either the media's interpretation of your work or the scientific community's interpretation of the implications of your work, kind of like the Mozart metaphor, where, "Oh, MRIs show that play enhances your intelligence.
Well, let's round these kids up, put them in pens and make them play for months at a time; they'll all be geniuses and go to Harvard."
How do you prevent people from taking that sort of action on the data that you're developing?
SB: Well, I think the only way I know to do it is to have accumulated the advisers that I have who go from practitioners -- who can establish through improvisational play or clowning or whatever -- a state of play.
So people know that it's there.
And then you get an fMRI specialist, and you get Frank Wilson, and you get other kinds of hard scientists, including neuroendocrinologists.
And you get them into a group together focused on play, and it's pretty hard not to take it seriously.
Unfortunately, that hasn't been done sufficiently for the National Science Foundation, National Institute of Mental Health or anybody else to really look at it in this way seriously.
I mean you don't hear about anything that's like cancer or heart disease associated with play.
And yet I see it as something that's just as basic for survival -- long term -- as learning some of the basic things about public health.
JH: Stuart Brown, thank you very much.
(Applause)
Time flies.
It's actually almost 20 years ago when I wanted to reframe the way we use information, the way we work together: I invented the World Wide Web.
Now, 20 years on, at TED, I want to ask your help in a new reframing.
So going back to 1989, I wrote a memo suggesting the global hypertext system.
Nobody really did anything with it, pretty much.
But 18 months later -- this is how innovation happens -- 18 months later, my boss said I could do it on the side, as a sort of a play project, kick the tires of a new computer we'd got.
And so he gave me the time to code it up.
So I basically roughed out what HTML should look like: hypertext protocol, HTTP; the idea of URLs, these names for things which started with HTTP.
I wrote the code and put it out there.
Why did I do it?
Well, it was basically frustration.
I was frustrated -- I was working as a software engineer in this huge, very exciting lab, lots of people coming from all over the world.
They brought all sorts of different computers with them.
They had all sorts of different data formats, all sorts, all kinds of documentation systems.
So that, in all that diversity, if I wanted to figure out how to build something out of a bit of this and a bit of this, everything I looked into, I had to connect to some new machine, I had to learn to run some new program, I would find the information I wanted in some new data format.
And these were all incompatible.
It was just very frustrating.
The frustration was all this unlocked potential.
In fact, on all these discs there were documents.
So if you just imagined them all being part of some big, virtual documentation system in the sky, say on the Internet, then life would be so much easier.
Well, once you've had an idea like that it kind of gets under your skin and even if people don't read your memo -- actually he did, it was found after he died, his copy.
He had written, "Vague, but exciting," in pencil, in the corner.
(Laughter) But in general it was difficult -- it was really difficult to explain what the web was like.
It's difficult to explain to people now that it was difficult then.
But then -- OK, when TED started, there was no web so things like "click" didn't have the same meaning.
I can show somebody a piece of hypertext, a page which has got links, and we click on the link and bing -- there'll be another hypertext page.
Not impressive.
You know, we've seen that -- we've got things on hypertext on CD-ROMs.
What was difficult was to get them to imagine: so, imagine that that link could have gone to virtually any document you could imagine.
Alright, that is the leap that was very difficult for people to make.
Well, some people did.
So yeah, it was difficult to explain, but there was a grassroots movement.
And that is what has made it most fun.
That has been the most exciting thing, not the technology, not the things people have done with it, but actually the community, the spirit of all these people getting together, sending the emails.
That's what it was like then.
Do you know what? It's funny, but right now it's kind of like that again.
I asked everybody, more or less, to put their documents -- I said, "Could you put your documents on this web thing?"
And you did.
Thanks.
It's been a blast, hasn't it?
I mean, it has been quite interesting because we've found out that the things that happen with the web really sort of blow us away.
They're much more than we'd originally imagined when we put together the little, initial website that we started off with.
Now, I want you to put your data on the web.
Turns out that there is still huge unlocked potential.
There is still a huge frustration that people have because we haven't got data on the web as data.
What do you mean, "data"? What's the difference -- documents, data?
Well, documents you read, OK?
More or less, you read them, you can follow links from them, and that's it.
Data -- you can do all kinds of stuff with a computer.
Who was here or has otherwise seen Hans Rosling's talk?
One of the great -- yes a lot of people have seen it -- one of the great TED Talks.
Hans put up this presentation in which he showed, for various different countries, in various different colors -- he showed income levels on one axis and he showed infant mortality, and he shot this thing animated through time.
So, he'd taken this data and made a presentation which just shattered a lot of myths that people had about the economics in the developing world.
He put up a slide a little bit like this.
It had underground all the data OK, data is brown and boxy and boring, and that's how we think of it, isn't it?
Because data you can't naturally use by itself But in fact, data drives a huge amount of what happens in our lives and it happens because somebody takes that data and does something with it.
In this case, Hans had put the data together he had found from all kinds of United Nations websites and things.
He had put it together, combined it into something more interesting than the original pieces and then he'd put it into this software, which I think his son developed, originally, and produces this wonderful presentation.
And Hans made a point of saying, "Look, it's really important to have a lot of data."
And I was happy to see that at the party last night that he was still saying, very forcibly, "It's really important to have a lot of data."
So I want us now to think about not just two pieces of data being connected, or six like he did, but I want to think about a world where everybody has put data on the web and so virtually everything you can imagine is on the web and then calling that linked data.
The technology is linked data, and it's extremely simple.
If you want to put something on the web there are three rules: first thing is that those HTTP names -- those things that start with "http:" -- we're using them not just for documents now, we're using them for things that the documents are about.
We're using them for people, we're using them for places, we're using them for your products, we're using them for events.
All kinds of conceptual things, they have names now that start with HTTP.
Second rule, if I take one of these HTTP names and I look it up and I do the web thing with it and I fetch the data using the HTTP protocol from the web, I will get back some data in a standard format which is kind of useful data that somebody might like to know about that thing, about that event.
Who's at the event? Whatever it is about that person, where they were born, things like that.
So the second rule is I get important information back.
Third rule is that when I get back that information it's not just got somebody's height and weight and when they were born, it's got relationships.
Data is relationships.
Interestingly, data is relationships.
This person was born in Berlin; Berlin is in Germany.
And when it has relationships, whenever it expresses a relationship then the other thing that it's related to is given one of those names that starts HTTP.
So, I can go ahead and look that thing up.
So I look up a person -- I can look up then the city where they were born; then I can look up the region it's in, and the town it's in, and the population of it, and so on.
So I can browse this stuff.
So that's it, really.
That is linked data.
I wrote an article entitled "Linked Data" a couple of years ago and soon after that, things started to happen.
The idea of linked data is that we get lots and lots and lots of these boxes that Hans had, and we get lots and lots and lots of things sprouting.
It's not just a whole lot of other plants.
It's not just a root supplying a plant, but for each of those plants, whatever it is -- a presentation, an analysis, somebody's looking for patterns in the data -- they get to look at all the data and they get it connected together, and the really important thing about data is the more things you have to connect together, the more powerful it is.
So, linked data.
The meme went out there.
And, pretty soon Chris Bizer at the Freie Universitat in Berlin who was one of the first people to put interesting things up, he noticed that Wikipedia -- you know Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia with lots and lots of interesting documents in it.
Well, in those documents, there are little squares, little boxes.
And in most information boxes, there's data.
So he wrote a program to take the data, extract it from Wikipedia, and put it into a blob of linked data on the web, which he called dbpedia.
Dbpedia is represented by the blue blob in the middle of this slide and if you actually go and look up Berlin, you'll find that there are other blobs of data which also have stuff about Berlin, and they're linked together.
So if you pull the data from dbpedia about Berlin, you'll end up pulling up these other things as well.
And the exciting thing is it's starting to grow.
This is just the grassroots stuff again, OK?
Let's think about data for a bit.
Data comes in fact in lots and lots of different forms.
Think of the diversity of the web. It's a really important thing that the web allows you to put all kinds of data up there.
So it is with data. I could talk about all kinds of data.
We could talk about government data, enterprise data is really important, there's scientific data, there's personal data, there's weather data, there's data about events, there's data about talks, and there's news and there's all kinds of stuff.
I'm just going to mention a few of them so that you get the idea of the diversity of it, so that you also see how much unlocked potential.
Let's start with government data.
Barack Obama said in a speech, that he -- American government data would be available on the Internet in accessible formats.
And I hope that they will put it up as linked data.
That's important. Why is it important?
Not just for transparency, yeah transparency in government is important, but that data -- this is the data from all the government departments Think about how much of that data is about how life is lived in America.
It's actual useful. It's got value.
I can use it in my company.
I could use it as a kid to do my homework.
So we're talking about making the place, making the world run better by making this data available.
In fact if you're responsible -- if you know about some data in a government department, often you find that these people, they're very tempted to keep it -- Hans calls it database hugging.
You hug your database, you don't want to let it go until you've made a beautiful website for it.
Well, I'd like to suggest that rather -- yes, make a beautiful website, who am I to say don't make a beautiful website?
Make a beautiful website, but first give us the unadulterated data, we want the data.
We want unadulterated data.
OK, we have to ask for raw data now.
And I'm going to ask you to practice that, OK?
Can you say "raw"?
Audience: Raw.
Tim Berners-Lee: Can you say "data"?
Audience: Data.
TBL: Can you say "now"?
Audience: Now!
TBL: Alright, "raw data now"!
Audience: Raw data now!
Practice that. It's important because you have no idea the number of excuses people come up with to hang onto their data and not give it to you, even though you've paid for it as a taxpayer.
And it's not just America. It's all over the world.
And it's not just governments, of course -- it's enterprises as well.
So I'm just going to mention a few other thoughts on data.
Here we are at TED, and all the time we are very conscious of the huge challenges that human society has right now -- curing cancer, understanding the brain for Alzheimer's, understanding the economy to make it a little bit more stable, understanding how the world works.
The people who are going to solve those -- the scientists -- they have half-formed ideas in their head, they try to communicate those over the web.
But a lot of the state of knowledge of the human race at the moment is on databases, often sitting in their computers, and actually, currently not shared.
In fact, I'll just go into one area -- if you're looking at Alzheimer's, for example, drug discovery -- there is a whole lot of linked data which is just coming out because scientists in that field realize this is a great way of getting out of those silos, because they had their genomics data in one database in one building, and they had their protein data in another.
Now, they are sticking it onto -- linked data -- and now they can ask the sort of question, that you probably wouldn't ask, I wouldn't ask -- they would.
What proteins are involved in signal transduction and also related to pyramidal neurons?
Well, you take that mouthful and you put it into Google.
Of course, there's no page on the web which has answered that question because nobody has asked that question before.
You get 223,000 hits -- no results you can use.
You ask the linked data -- which they've now put together -- 32 hits, each of which is a protein which has those properties and you can look at.
The power of being able to ask those questions, as a scientist -- questions which actually bridge across different disciplines -- is really a complete sea change.
It's very very important.
Scientists are totally stymied at the moment -- the power of the data that other scientists have collected is locked up and we need to get it unlocked so we can tackle those huge problems.
Now if I go on like this, you'll think that all the data comes from huge institutions and has nothing to do with you.
But, that's not true.
In fact, data is about our lives.
You just -- you log on to your social networking site, your favorite one, you say, "This is my friend."
Bing! Relationship. Data.
You say, "This photograph, it's about -- it depicts this person. " Bing! That's data. Data, data, data.
Every time you do things on the social networking site, the social networking site is taking data and using it -- re-purposing it -- and using it to make other people's lives more interesting on the site.
But, when you go to another linked data site -- and let's say this is one about travel, and you say, "I want to send this photo to all the people in that group," you can't get over the walls.
The Economist wrote an article about it, and lots of people have blogged about it -- tremendous frustration.
The way to break down the silos is to get inter-operability between social networking sites.
We need to do that with linked data.
One last type of data I'll talk about, maybe it's the most exciting.
Before I came down here, I looked it up on OpenStreetMap The OpenStreetMap's a map, but it's also a Wiki.
Zoom in and that square thing is a theater -- which we're in right now -- The Terrace Theater. It didn't have a name on it.
So I could go into edit mode, I could select the theater, I could add down at the bottom the name, and I could save it back.
And now if you go back to the OpenStreetMap. org, and you find this place, you will find that The Terrace Theater has got a name.
I did that. Me!
I did that to the map. I just did that!
I put that up on there. Hey, you know what?
If I -- that street map is all about everybody doing their bit and it creates an incredible resource because everybody else does theirs.
And that is what linked data is all about.
It's about people doing their bit to produce a little bit, and it all connecting.
That's how linked data works.
You do your bit. Everybody else does theirs.
You may not have lots of data which you have yourself to put on there but you know to demand it.
And we've practiced that.
So, linked data -- it's huge.
I've only told you a very small number of things There are data in every aspect of our lives, every aspect of work and pleasure, and it's not just about the number of places where data comes, it's about connecting it together.
And when you connect data together, you get power in a way that doesn't happen just with the web, with documents.
You get this really huge power out of it.
So, we're at the stage now where we have to do this -- the people who think it's a great idea.
And all the people -- and I think there's a lot of people at TED who do things because -- even though there's not an immediate return on the investment because it will only really pay off when everybody else has done it -- they'll do it because they're the sort of person who just does things which would be good if everybody else did them.
OK, so it's called linked data.
I want you to make it.
I want you to demand it.
And I think it's an idea worth spreading.
Thanks.
(Applause)
[This talk contains mature content] Five years ago, I received a phone call that would change my life.
I remember so vividly that day.
It was about this time of year, and I was sitting in my office.
I remember the sun streaming through the window.
And my phone rang.
And I picked it up, and it was two federal agents, asking for my help in identifying a little girl featured in hundreds of child sexual abuse images they had found online.
They had just started working the case, but what they knew was that her abuse had been broadcast to the world for years on dark web sites dedicated to the sexual abuse of children.
And her abuser was incredibly technologically sophisticated: new images and new videos every few weeks, but very few clues as to who she was or where she was.
And so they called us, because they had heard we were a new nonprofit building technology to fight child sexual abuse.
But we were only two years old, and we had only worked on child sex trafficking.
And I had to tell them we had nothing.
We had nothing that could help them stop this abuse.
It took those agents another year to ultimately find that child.
And by the time she was rescued, hundreds of images and videos documenting her rape had gone viral, from the dark web to peer-to-peer networks, private chat rooms and to the websites you and I use every single day.
And today, as she struggles to recover, she lives with the fact that thousands around the world continue to watch her abuse.
I have come to learn in the last five years that this case is far from unique.
How did we get here as a society?
In the late 1980s, child pornography -- or what it actually is, child sexual abuse material -- was nearly eliminated.
New laws and increased prosecutions made it simply too risky to trade it through the mail.
And then came the internet, and the market exploded.
The amount of content in circulation today is massive and growing.
This is a truly global problem, but if we just look at the US: in the US alone last year, more than 45 million images and videos of child sexual abuse material were reported to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, and that is nearly double the amount the year prior.
And the details behind these numbers are hard to contemplate, with more than 60 percent of the images featuring children younger than 12, and most of them including extreme acts of sexual violence.
Abusers are cheered on in chat rooms dedicated to the abuse of children, where they gain rank and notoriety with more abuse and more victims.
In this market, the currency has become the content itself.
It's clear that abusers have been quick to leverage new technologies, but our response as a society has not.
These abusers don't read user agreements of websites, and the content doesn't honor geographic boundaries.
And they win when we look at one piece of the puzzle at a time, which is exactly how our response today is designed.
Law enforcement works in one jurisdiction.
Companies look at just their platform.
And whatever data they learn along the way is rarely shared.
It is so clear that this disconnected approach is not working.
We have to redesign our response to this epidemic for the digital age.
And that's exactly what we're doing at Thorn.
We're building the technology to connect these dots, to arm everyone on the front lines -- law enforcement, NGOs and companies -- with the tools they need to ultimately eliminate child sexual abuse material from the internet.
Let's talk for a minute -- (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Let's talk for a minute about what those dots are.
As you can imagine, this content is horrific.
If you don't have to look at it, you don't want to look at it.
And so, most companies or law enforcement agencies that have this content can translate every file into a unique string of numbers.
This is called a "hash."
It's essentially a fingerprint for each file or each video.
And what this allows them to do is use the information in investigations or for a company to remove the content from their platform, without having to relook at every image and every video each time.
The problem today, though, is that there are hundreds of millions of these hashes sitting in siloed databases all around the world.
In a silo, it might work for the one agency that has control over it, but not connecting this data means we don't know how many are unique.
We don't know which ones represent children who have already been rescued or need to be identified still.
So our first, most basic premise is that all of this data must be connected.
There are two ways where this data, combined with software on a global scale, can have transformative impact in this space.
The first is with law enforcement: helping them identify new victims faster, stopping abuse and stopping those producing this content.
The second is with companies: using it as clues to identify the hundreds of millions of files in circulation today, pulling it down and then stopping the upload of new material before it ever goes viral.
Four years ago, when that case ended, our team sat there, and we just felt this, um ...
... deep sense of failure, is the way I can put it, because we watched that whole year while they looked for her.
And we saw every place in the investigation where, if the technology would have existed, they would have found her faster.
And so we walked away from that and we went and we did the only thing we knew how to do: we began to build software.
So we've started with law enforcement.
Our dream was an alarm bell on the desks of officers all around the world so that if anyone dare post a new victim online, someone would start looking for them immediately.
I obviously can't talk about the details of that software, but today it's at work in 38 countries, having reduced the time it takes to get to a child by more than 65 percent.
(Applause) And now we're embarking on that second horizon: building the software to help companies identify and remove this content.
Let's talk for a minute about these companies.
So, I told you -- 45 million images and videos in the US alone last year.
Those come from just 12 companies.
Twelve companies, 45 million files of child sexual abuse material.
These come from those companies that have the money to build the infrastructure that it takes to pull this content down.
But there are hundreds of other companies, small- to medium-size companies around the world, that need to do this work, but they either: 1) can't imagine that their platform would be used for abuse, or 2) don't have the money to spend on something that is not driving revenue.
So we went ahead and built it for them, and this system now gets smarter with the more companies that participate.
Let me give you an example.
Our first partner, Imgur -- if you haven't heard of this company, it's one of the most visited websites in the US -- millions of pieces of user-generated content uploaded every single day, in a mission to make the internet a more fun place.
They partnered with us first.
Within 20 minutes of going live on our system, someone tried to upload a known piece of abuse material.
They were able to stop it, they pull it down, they report it to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
But they went a step further, and they went and inspected the account of the person who had uploaded it.
Hundreds more pieces of child sexual abuse material that we had never seen.
And this is where we start to see exponential impact.
We pull that material down, it gets reported to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children and then those hashes go back into the system and benefit every other company on it.
And when the millions of hashes we have lead to millions more and, in real time, companies around the world are identifying and pulling this content down, we will have dramatically increased the speed at which we are removing child sexual abuse material from the internet around the world.
(Applause) But this is why it can't just be about software and data, it has to be about scale.
We have to activate thousands of officers, hundreds of companies around the world if technology will allow us to outrun the perpetrators and dismantle the communities that are normalizing child sexual abuse around the world today.
And the time to do this is now.
We can no longer say we don't know the impact this is having on our children.
The first generation of children whose abuse has gone viral are now young adults.
The Canadian Centre for Child Protection just did a recent study of these young adults to understand the unique trauma they try to recover from, knowing that their abuse lives on.
Eighty percent of these young adults have thought about suicide.
More than 60 percent have attempted suicide.
And most of them live with the fear every single day that as they walk down the street or they interview for a job or they go to school or they meet someone online, that that person has seen their abuse.
And the reality came true for more than 30 percent of them.
They had been recognized from their abuse material online.
This is not going to be easy, but it is not impossible.
Now it's going to take the will, the will of our society to look at something that is really hard to look at, to take something out of the darkness so these kids have a voice; the will of companies to take action and make sure that their platforms are not complicit in the abuse of a child; the will of governments to invest with their law enforcement for the tools they need to investigate a digital first crime, even when the victims cannot speak for themselves.
This audacious commitment is part of that will.
It's a declaration of war against one of humanity's darkest evils.
But what I hang on to is that it's actually an investment in a future where every child can simply be a kid.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Im going around the world giving talks about Darwin, and usually what Im talking about is Darwins strange inversion of reasoning.
Now that title, that phrase, comes from a critic, an early critic, and this is a passage that I just love, and would like to read for you.
"In the theory with which we have to deal, Absolute Ignorance is the artificer; so that we may enunciate as the fundamental principle of the whole system, that, in order to make a perfect and beautiful machine, it is not requisite to know how to make it.
This proposition will be found on careful examination to express, in condensed form, the essential purport of the Theory, and to express in a few words all Mr. Darwins meaning; who, by a strange inversion of reasoning, seems to think Absolute Ignorance fully qualified to take the place of Absolute Wisdom in the achievements of creative skill."
Exactly. Exactly. And it is a strange inversion.
A creationist pamphlet has this wonderful page in it: "Test Two: Do you know of any building that didnt have a builder? Yes/No.
Do you know of any painting that didnt have a painter? Yes/No.
Do you know of any car that didnt have a maker? Yes/No.
If you answered 'Yes' for any of the above, give details."
A-ha! I mean, it really is a strange inversion of reasoning.
You would have thought it stands to reason that design requires an intelligent designer.
But Darwin shows that its just false.
Today, though, Im going to talk about Darwins other strange inversion, which is equally puzzling at first, but in some ways just as important.
It stands to reason that we love chocolate cake because it is sweet.
Guys go for girls like this because they are sexy.
We adore babies because theyre so cute.
And, of course, we are amused by jokes because they are funny.
This is all backwards. It is. And Darwin shows us why.
Lets start with sweet. Our sweet tooth is basically an evolved sugar detector, because sugar is high energy, and its just been wired up to the preferer, to put it very crudely, and thats why we like sugar.
Honey is sweet because we like it, not "we like it because honey is sweet."
Theres nothing intrinsically sweet about honey.
If you looked at glucose molecules till you were blind, you wouldnt see why they tasted sweet.
You have to look in our brains to understand why theyre sweet.
So if you think first there was sweetness, and then we evolved to like sweetness, youve got it backwards; thats just wrong. Its the other way round.
Sweetness was born with the wiring which evolved.
And theres nothing intrinsically sexy about these young ladies.
And its a good thing that there isnt, because if there were, then Mother Nature would have a problem: How on earth do you get chimps to mate?
Now you might think, ah, theres a solution: hallucinations.
That would be one way of doing it, but theres a quicker way.
Just wire the chimps up to love that look, and apparently they do.
Thats all there is to it.
Over six million years, we and the chimps evolved our different ways.
We became bald-bodied, oddly enough; for one reason or another, they didnt.
If we hadnt, then probably this would be the height of sexiness.
Our sweet tooth is an evolved and instinctual preference for high-energy food.
It wasnt designed for chocolate cake.
Chocolate cake is a supernormal stimulus.
The term is owed to Niko Tinbergen, who did his famous experiments with gulls, where he found that that orange spot on the gulls beak -- if he made a bigger, oranger spot the gull chicks would peck at it even harder.
It was a hyperstimulus for them, and they loved it.
What we see with, say, chocolate cake is its a supernormal stimulus to tweak our design wiring.
And there are lots of supernormal stimuli; chocolate cake is one.
There's lots of supernormal stimuli for sexiness.
And there's even supernormal stimuli for cuteness. Heres a pretty good example.
Its important that we love babies, and that we not be put off by, say, messy diapers.
So babies have to attract our affection and our nurturing, and they do.
And, by the way, a recent study shows that mothers prefer the smell of the dirty diapers of their own baby.
So nature works on many levels here.
But now, if babies didnt look the way they do -- if babies looked like this, thats what we would find adorable, thats what we would find -- we would think, oh my goodness, do I ever want to hug that.
This is the strange inversion.
Well now, finally what about funny. My answer is, its the same story, the same story.
This is the hard one, the one that isnt obvious. Thats why I leave it to the end.
And I wont be able to say too much about it.
But you have to think evolutionarily, you have to think, what hard job that has to be done -- its dirty work, somebodys got to do it -- is so important to give us such a powerful, inbuilt reward for it when we succeed.
Now, I think we've found the answer -- I and a few of my colleagues.
Its a neural system thats wired up to reward the brain for doing a grubby clerical job.
Our bumper sticker for this view is that this is the joy of debugging.
Now Im not going to have time to spell it all out, but Ill just say that only some kinds of debugging get the reward.
And what were doing is were using humor as a sort of neuroscientific probe by switching humor on and off, by turning the knob on a joke -- now its not funny ... oh, now its funnier ...
now well turn a little bit more ... now its not funny -- in this way, we can actually learn something about the architecture of the brain, the functional architecture of the brain.
Matthew Hurley is the first author of this. We call it the Hurley Model.
Hes a computer scientist, Reginald Adams a psychologist, and there I am, and were putting this together into a book.
Thank you very much.
I am an astrophysicist.
I research stellar explosions across the universe.
But I have a flaw: I'm restless, and I get bored easily.
And although as an astrophysicist, I have the incredible opportunity to study the entire universe, the thought of doing only that, always that, makes me feel caged and limited.
What if my issues with keeping attention and getting bored were not a flaw, though?
What if I could turn them into an asset?
An astrophysicist cannot touch or interact with the things that she studies.
No way to explode a star in a lab to figure out why or how it blew up.
Just pictures and movies of the sky.
Everything we know about the universe, from the big bang that originated space and time, to the formation and evolution of stars and galaxies, to the structure of our own solar system, we figured out studying images of the sky.
And to study a system as complex as the entire universe, astrophysicists are experts at extracting simple models and solutions from large and complex data sets.
So what else can I do with this expertise?
What if we turned the camera around towards us?
At the Urban Observatory, that is exactly what we are doing.
Greg Dobler, also an astrophysicist and my husband, created the first urban observatory in New York University in 2013, and I joined in 2015.
Here are some of the things that we do.
We take pictures of the city at night and study city lights like stars.
By studying how light changes over time and the color of astronomical lights, I gain insight about the nature of exploding stars.
By studying city lights the same way, we can measure and predict how much energy the city needs and consumes and help build a resilient grid that will support the needs of growing urban environments.
In daytime images, we capture plumes of pollution.
Seventy-five percent of greenhouse gases in New York City come from a building like this one, burning oil for heat.
You can measure pollution with air quality sensors.
But imagine putting a sensor on each New York City building, reading in data from a million monitors.
Imagine the cost.
With a team of NYU students, we built a mathematical model, a neural network that can detect and track these plumes over the New York City skyline.
We can classify them -- harmless steam plumes, white and evanescent; polluting smokestacks, dark and persistent -- and provide policy makers with a map of neighborhood pollution.
This cross-disciplinary project created transformational solutions.
But the data analysis methodologies we use in astrophysics can be applied to all sorts of data, not just images.
We were asked to help a California district attorney understand prosecutorial delays in their jurisdiction.
There are people on probation or sitting in jail, awaiting for trial sometimes for years.
They wanted to know what kind of cases dragged on, and they had a massive data set to explore to understand it, but didn't have the expertise or the instruments in their office to do so.
And that's where we came in.
I worked with my colleague, public policy professor Angela Hawken, and our team first created a visual dashboard for DAs to see and better understand the prosecution process.
But also, we ourselves analyzed their data, looking to see if the duration of the process suffered from social inequalities in their jurisdiction.
We did so using methods that I would use to classify thousands of stellar explosions, applied to thousands of court cases.
And in doing so, we built a model that can be applied to other jurisdictions who are willing to explore their biases.
These collaborations between domain experts and astrophysicists created transformational solutions to help improve people's quality of life.
But it is a two-way road.
I bring my astrophysics background to urban science, and I bring what I learn in urban science back to astrophysics.
Light echoes: the reflections of stellar explosions onto interstellar dust.
In our images, these reflections appear as white, evanescent, moving features, just like plumes.
I am adapting the same models that detect plumes in city images to detect light echoes in images of the sky.
By exploring the things that interest and excite me, reaching outside of my domain, I did turn my restlessness into an asset.
We, you, all have a unique perspective that can generate new insight and lead to new, unexpected, transformational solutions.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As fashion designers, our decisions have the power to change our culture.
We choose who is cast in our runway shows and campaigns, and ultimately, who is celebrated and considered beautiful, and who is not.
Having this platform is a responsibility.
One that can be utilized to exclude people or to empower others.
Growing up, I was obsessed with fashion.
I pored over all different types of fashion magazines at my local Barnes and Noble.
To be fashionable was to be tall, skinny, with long, shiny hair.
That's what I saw as the ideal, and it was reinforced everywhere I looked.
And to be honest, it still is.
I wanted to be like the models, so I stopped eating.
It was a dark time in my life; my eating disorder consumed me.
All I could think about was counting every single calorie, and waking up early before school every day so I could run a few miles.
It took me years to finally release the grip that the eating disorder had over my life.
But when it did, it freed up so much brain space to think about what I was truly passionate about.
For so long, the fashion industry has worked hard to set an ideal of beauty that celebrates thin, young, white, cisgender, able-bodied models as the ideal.
It's impossible not to be bombarded with images of models that have been photoshopped to where there's not a single pore, fat roll or stretch mark in sight.
You don't need to look hard to find examples.
This definition of beauty is damaging, dangerous and destructive, and we need to explode it immediately.
(Applause) I'm glad you agree.
(Laughter) One of the worst things I've realized over the years is that my experience with disordered eating is not an anomaly.
In fact, it's par for the course.
I think there's a study that says 91 percent of women, and likely those of all gender identities, are unhappy with the way they look.
It's unforgivable that we live in a society where it's normal or expected for teenagers to grow up hating themselves.
We've been fighting for fat acceptance and women's body autonomy since the '60s.
And there has been headway.
We have plus-size models like Ashley Graham and musicians with body-positive messages, like Lizzo, breaking into the mainstream.
Thank God.
(Laughter) There's brands like Area that have released campaigns without any Photoshop retouching.
But we're still inundated with unrealistic expectations.
I love this quote by Lizzo, who said, "Body positivity only exists because body negativity is the norm."
So how do we change the stigma around looking different or not fitting into this narrow definition of beauty?
I believe it's by celebrating beauty in all different forms, bold and unapologetically.
But many fashion designers continue to reinforce this narrow definition of beauty.
From the way they are taught in school and into the real world, they drape on mannequins that are only size four, or sketch on bodies that are super stretched out and not anatomically proportioned.
Different-size bodies aren't taken into account during the design process.
They're not thought of.
So who are these designers designing for?
But the conversation around exclusivity in fashion doesn't begin and end with size.
It's about seeing people of all different gender expressions, different ability levels, different ages, different races and ethnicities, celebrated for their own unique beauty.
In my own work as a fashion designer, I started a brand called Chromat, and we're committed to empowering women, femmes and nonbinary #ChromatBABES, of all shapes and sizes, through perfectly fit garments for every body.
Swimwear has become a huge focus for me, because of the power that this single garment can have over the way people feel about themselves.
We wanted to take our focus on celebrating all body types to a garment that's fraught with insecurity.
On our runways, you see curves, cellulite and scars worn proudly.
We're a runway show, yes, but we're also a celebration.
I didn't start designing 10 years ago with the mission to change the entire industry.
But the models we cast at the time, who just happened to be my friends who had begged to be in my shows, were so radical to some people, and, unfortunately, still are different or strange to some, that it became a huge part of what we're known for.
However, inclusivity means nothing if it's only surface level.
Behind the scenes, from the photographer, to the casting director, to the interns, who is making the decisions behind the scenes is just as important.
It's imperative to include diverse decision-makers in the process, and it's always better to collaborate with different communities, rather than trying to speak for them.
And this is an important piece of the puzzle that many young designers may not think about when they're first starting their careers, but hiring a plus-size or a transgender photographer, or a woman of color as your casting director, or a black makeup artist -- hey, Fatima Thomas -- who intimately understands how important it is to be able to work with all skin tones: it's essential to creating a holistically inclusive output, like this one.
As a fashion designers that do a lot of swim, we wanted to rewrite the rules around having a bikini body.
So we cast a team of babe guards to enforce guidelines around inclusion and acceptance at the pool.
Instead of "no diving" and "no running," how about "celebrate cellulite," "body policing prohibited," and "intolerance not tolerated."
And this was enforced by babe guards Mama Cax, Denise Bidot, Geena Rocero, Ericka Hart and Emme, all activists in their own right.
I've always felt it was important to show a range of different bodies in our runway shows and campaigns.
But it actually wasn't until recently that we were able to expand our size range in a major way.
We first launched our curve collection five years ago; we were so excited.
But when it launched, it fell flat.
Nobody was interested.
None of our department stores stocked above a size large, and if they did, it was somewhere else in the building entirely.
In fact, one time our sales team said, "You know, it's so cool you have trans models and curve models on the runway -- I love what you're doing.
But when the buyers come in to see the collection for market, they want to be sold a dream, they want to see something that they aspire to be."
Implying that our models weren't that.
But I've realized it's so much more important to open up this dream to more people.
I want the consumer to know that it's not your body that needs to change -- it's the clothes.
(Applause) There needs to be more fashion options at all sizes and in all retailers.
So finally, in 2018, Nordstrom actually placed an order up to 3X.
And this was a huge game changer for us to have a major retailer invest in adding these units, so we could go to the factory -- now we go up to 4X, which is about a size 32.
Having that investment helped us to change and realign our entire design process.
We now have different-sized bodies to sketch and drape on in the studio.
And if more fashion schools taught these skills, more designers would have the ability to design for all bodies.
(Applause) So as fashion designers, it's our job to utilize our platform to explode this narrow and restrictive definition of beauty.
My goal is that one day, teenagers growing up don't feel the same pressure that I did to conform.
And I hope that our work contributes to the fashion industry's opening up to celebrate many different identities.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers)
[This is an improvised talk (and intro) based on a suggested topic from the audience.
The speaker doesn't know the content of the slides.] Moderator: Our next speaker -- (Laughter) is an -- incredibly -- (Laughter) Is an incredibly experienced linguist working at a lab at MIT with a small group of researchers, and through studying our language and the way that we communicate with other people, he has stumbled upon the secret of human intimacy.
Here to give us his perspective, please welcome to the stage, Anthony Veneziale.
(Applause) (Laughter) Anthony Veneziale: You might think I know what you're going through.
You might be looking at me here on the red dot, or you might be looking at me on the screen.
There's a one sixth of a second delay.
Did I catch myself? I did.
I could see myself before I turned, and that small delay creates a little bit of a divide.
(Laughter) And a divide is exactly what happens with human language, and the processing of that language.
I of course am working out of a small lab at MIT.
(Laughter) And we are scraping for every insight that we can get.
(Laughter) This is not often associated with a computational challenge, but in this case, we found that persistence of vision and auditory intake actually have more in common than we ever realized, and we can see it in this first slide.
(Laughter) (Applause) Immediately your processing goes to, "Is that a hard-boiled egg?"
(Laughter) "Is that perhaps the structural integrity of the egg being able to sustain the weight of what seems to be a rock?
Aha, is it in fact a real rock?"
We go to questions when we see visual information.
But when we hear information, this is what happens.
(Laughter) The floodgates in our mind open much like the streets of Shanghai.
(Applause) So many pieces of information to process, so many ideas, concepts, feelings and, of course, vulnerabilities that we don't often wish to share.
And so we hide, and we hide behind what we like to call the floodgate of intimacy.
(Laughter) And what might that floodgate be holding?
What is the dike upon which it is built?
Well, first off -- (Laughter) we found that it's different for six different genotypes.
(Applause) And, of course, we can start categorizing these genotypes into a neuronormative experience and a neurodiverse experience.
(Laughter) On the right-hand side of the screen, you're seeing spikes for the neurodiverse thinking.
Now, there are generally only two emotional states that a neurodiverse brain can tabulate and keep count of at any given time, thereby eliminating the possibility for them to be emotionally, sometimes, attuned to the present situation.
But on the left-hand side, you can see the neuronormative brain, which can often handle about five different pieces of emotional cognitive information at any given time.
These are the slight variances that you are seeing in the 75, 90 and 60 percentile, and then of course that dramatic difference of the 25, 40 and 35 percentile.
(Laughter) But of course, what is the neural network that is helping to bridge and build these different discrepancies?
(Laughter) Fear.
(Laughter) (Applause) And as we all know, fear resides in the amygdala, and it is a very natural response, and it is very closely linked with visual perception.
It is not as closely linked with verbal perception, so our fear receptors often will be going off in advance of any of our cognitive usage around verbal and words and cues of language.
So as we see these fear moments, we of course are taken aback.
We stumble in a certain direction, generally away from the intimacy.
(Laughter) Now of course, there's a difference between the male perception and the female perception and of trans and those who are in between, all of those as well, and outside of the gender spectrum.
(Laughter) But fear is the central underlying underpinning of all of our response systems.
Fight-or-flight is one of the earliest, some say reptilian, response to our environment.
How can we disengage or unhook ourselves from the horns of the amygdala?
(Laughter) Well, I'd like to tell you the secret right now.
(Applause) This is all making much, much too much sense.
(Laughter) The secret lies in turning our backs to one another, and I know that that sounds absolutely like the opposite of what you were expecting, but when in a relationship you turn your back to your partner and place your back upon their back -- (Laughter) you eliminate visual cues.
(Laughter) (Applause) You are more readily available to failing first, and failing first -- (Laughter) far outweighs the lengths we go to to appeal to others, to our partners and to ourselves.
We spend billions and billions of dollars on clothing, on makeup, on the latest trend of glasses, but what we don't spend money and time on is connecting with each other in a way that is truthful and honest and stripped of those visual receptors.
(Applause) (Laughter) It sounds hard, doesn't it?
(Laughter) But we want to be aggressive about this.
We don't want to just sit on the couch.
As a historian said earlier today, it's important to get up and circumvent sometimes that couch.
And how can we do it?
Well yes, ice is a big part of it.
Insights, compassion and empathy: I, C, E.
(Applause) And when we start using this ice method, well, the possibilities become much bigger than us.
In fact, they become smaller than you.
On a molecular level, I believe that that insight is the unifying theme for every talk you have seen so far at TED and will continue as we of course embark on this journey here on this tiny planet, on the ledge, on the precipice, as we are seeing, yes, death is inevitable.
(Laughter) Will it meet all of us at the same time, I think, is the variable we are inquiring.
(Laughter) I think that timeline gets a bit longer when we use ice and when we rest our backs upon one another and build together, leaving behind the fear and working towards -- (Laughter) they'll edit this part out -- (Laughter) a ripened experience of love, compassion, intimacy based on a truth that you are sharing from your mind's eye and the heart that we all can touch, tactilely feel, have maybe potentially a mushy experience that we don't just throw out because it is browned, but let us slice in half the experience we have gathered, let us seed what the heart, the core, the seed of that idea in each of us is, and let us share it back to back.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I want to talk to you today a little bit about predictable irrationality.
And my interest in irrational behavior started many years ago in the hospital.
I was burned very badly.
And if you spend a lot of time in hospital, you'll see a lot of types of irrationalities.
And the one that particularly bothered me in the burn department was the process by which the nurses took the bandage off me.
Now, you must have all taken a Band-Aid off at some point, and you must have wondered what's the right approach.
Do you rip it off quickly -- short duration but high intensity -- or do you take your Band-Aid off slowly -- you take a long time, but each second is not as painful -- which one of those is the right approach?
The nurses in my department thought that the right approach was the ripping one, so they would grab hold and they would rip, and they would grab hold and they would rip.
And because I had 70 percent of my body burned, it would take about an hour.
And as you can imagine, I hated that moment of ripping with incredible intensity.
And I would try to reason with them and say, "Why don't we try something else?
Why don't we take it a little longer -- maybe two hours instead of an hour -- and have less of this intensity?"
And the nurses told me two things.
They told me that they had the right model of the patient -- that they knew what was the right thing to do to minimize my pain -- and they also told me that the word patient doesn't mean to make suggestions or to interfere or ...
This is not just in Hebrew, by the way.
It's in every language I've had experience with so far.
And, you know, there's not much -- there wasn't much I could do, and they kept on doing what they were doing.
And about three years later, when I left the hospital, I started studying at the university.
And one of the most interesting lessons I learned was that there is an experimental method that if you have a question you can create a replica of this question in some abstract way, and you can try to examine this question, maybe learn something about the world.
So that's what I did.
I was still interested in this question of how do you take bandages off burn patients.
So originally I didn't have much money, so I went to a hardware store and I bought a carpenter's vice.
And I would bring people to the lab and I would put their finger in it, and I would crunch it a little bit.
(Laughter) And I would crunch it for long periods and short periods, and pain that went up and pain that went down, and with breaks and without breaks -- all kinds of versions of pain.
And when I finished hurting people a little bit, I would ask them, so, how painful was this? Or, how painful was this?
Or, if you had to choose between the last two, which one would you choose?
(Laughter) I kept on doing this for a while.
(Laughter) And then, like all good academic projects, I got more funding.
I moved to sounds, electrical shocks -- I even had a pain suit that I could get people to feel much more pain.
But at the end of this process, what I learned was that the nurses were wrong.
Here were wonderful people with good intentions and plenty of experience, and nevertheless they were getting things wrong predictably all the time.
It turns out that because we don't encode duration in the way that we encode intensity, I would have had less pain if the duration would have been longer and the intensity was lower.
It turns out it would have been better to start with my face, which was much more painful, and move toward my legs, giving me a trend of improvement over time -- that would have been also less painful.
And it also turns out that it would have been good to give me breaks in the middle to kind of recuperate from the pain.
All of these would have been great things to do, and my nurses had no idea.
And from that point on I started thinking, are the nurses the only people in the world who get things wrong in this particular decision, or is it a more general case?
And it turns out it's a more general case -- there's a lot of mistakes we do.
And I want to give you one example of one of these irrationalities, and I want to talk to you about cheating.
And the reason I picked cheating is because it's interesting, but also it tells us something, I think, about the stock market situation we're in.
So, my interest in cheating started when Enron came on the scene, exploded all of a sudden, and I started thinking about what is happening here.
Is it the case that there was kind of a few apples who are capable of doing these things, or are we talking a more endemic situation, that many people are actually capable of behaving this way?
So, like we usually do, I decided to do a simple experiment.
And here's how it went.
If you were in the experiment, I would pass you a sheet of paper with 20 simple math problems that everybody could solve, but I wouldn't give you enough time.
When the five minutes were over, I would say, "Pass me the sheets of paper, and I'll pay you a dollar per question."
People did this. I would pay people four dollars for their task -- on average people would solve four problems.
Other people I would tempt to cheat.
I would pass their sheet of paper.
When the five minutes were over, I would say, "Please shred the piece of paper.
Put the little pieces in your pocket or in your backpack, and tell me how many questions you got correctly."
People now solved seven questions on average.
Now, it wasn't as if there was a few bad apples -- a few people cheated a lot.
Instead, what we saw is a lot of people who cheat a little bit.
Now, in economic theory, cheating is a very simple cost-benefit analysis.
You say, what's the probability of being caught?
How much do I stand to gain from cheating?
And how much punishment would I get if I get caught?
And you weigh these options out -- you do the simple cost-benefit analysis, and you decide whether it's worthwhile to commit the crime or not.
So, we try to test this.
For some people, we varied how much money they could get away with -- how much money they could steal.
We paid them 10 cents per correct question, 50 cents, a dollar, five dollars, 10 dollars per correct question.
You would expect that as the amount of money on the table increases, people would cheat more, but in fact it wasn't the case.
We got a lot of people cheating by stealing by a little bit.
What about the probability of being caught?
Some people shredded half the sheet of paper, so there was some evidence left.
Some people shredded the whole sheet of paper.
Some people shredded everything, went out of the room, and paid themselves from the bowl of money that had over 100 dollars.
You would expect that as the probability of being caught goes down, people would cheat more, but again, this was not the case.
Again, a lot of people cheated by just by a little bit, and they were insensitive to these economic incentives.
So we said, "If people are not sensitive to the economic rational theory explanations, to these forces, what could be going on?"
And we thought maybe what is happening is that there are two forces.
At one hand, we all want to look at ourselves in the mirror and feel good about ourselves, so we don't want to cheat.
On the other hand, we can cheat a little bit, and still feel good about ourselves.
So, maybe what is happening is that there's a level of cheating we can't go over, but we can still benefit from cheating at a low degree, as long as it doesn't change our impressions about ourselves.
We call this like a personal fudge factor.
Now, how would you test a personal fudge factor?
Initially we said, what can we do to shrink the fudge factor?
So, we got people to the lab, and we said, "We have two tasks for you today."
First, we asked half the people to recall either 10 books they read in high school, or to recall The Ten Commandments, and then we tempted them with cheating.
Turns out the people who tried to recall The Ten Commandments -- and in our sample nobody could recall all of The Ten Commandments -- but those people who tried to recall The Ten Commandments, given the opportunity to cheat, did not cheat at all.
It wasn't that the more religious people -- the people who remembered more of the Commandments -- cheated less, and the less religious people -- the people who couldn't remember almost any Commandments -- cheated more.
The moment people thought about trying to recall The Ten Commandments, they stopped cheating.
In fact, even when we gave self-declared atheists the task of swearing on the Bible and we give them a chance to cheat, they don't cheat at all.
Now, Ten Commandments is something that is hard to bring into the education system, so we said, "Why don't we get people to sign the honor code?"
So, we got people to sign, "I understand that this short survey falls under the MIT Honor Code."
Then they shredded it. No cheating whatsoever.
And this is particularly interesting, because MIT doesn't have an honor code.
(Laughter) So, all this was about decreasing the fudge factor.
What about increasing the fudge factor?
The first experiment -- I walked around MIT and I distributed six-packs of Cokes in the refrigerators -- these were common refrigerators for the undergrads.
And I came back to measure what we technically call the half-lifetime of Coke -- how long does it last in the refrigerators?
As you can expect it doesn't last very long; people take it.
In contrast, I took a plate with six one-dollar bills, and I left those plates in the same refrigerators.
No bill ever disappeared.
Now, this is not a good social science experiment, so to do it better I did the same experiment as I described to you before.
A third of the people we passed the sheet, they gave it back to us.
A third of the people we passed it to, they shredded it, they came to us and said, "Mr. Experimenter, I solved X problems. Give me X dollars."
A third of the people, when they finished shredding the piece of paper, they came to us and said, "Mr Experimenter, I solved X problems. Give me X tokens."
We did not pay them with dollars; we paid them with something else.
And then they took the something else, they walked 12 feet to the side, and exchanged it for dollars.
Think about the following intuition.
How bad would you feel about taking a pencil from work home, compared to how bad would you feel about taking 10 cents from a petty cash box?
These things feel very differently.
Would being a step removed from cash for a few seconds by being paid by token make a difference?
Our subjects doubled their cheating.
I'll tell you what I think about this and the stock market in a minute.
But this did not solve the big problem I had with Enron yet, because in Enron, there's also a social element.
People see each other behaving.
In fact, every day when we open the news we see examples of people cheating.
What does this cause us?
So, we did another experiment.
We got a big group of students to be in the experiment, and we prepaid them.
So everybody got an envelope with all the money for the experiment, and we told them that at the end, we asked them to pay us back the money they didn't make. OK?
The same thing happens.
When we give people the opportunity to cheat, they cheat.
They cheat just by a little bit, all the same.
But in this experiment we also hired an acting student.
This acting student stood up after 30 seconds, and said, "I solved everything. What do I do now?"
And the experimenter said, "If you've finished everything, go home.
That's it. The task is finished."
So, now we had a student -- an acting student -- that was a part of the group.
Nobody knew it was an actor.
And they clearly cheated in a very, very serious way.
What would happen to the other people in the group?
Will they cheat more, or will they cheat less?
Here is what happens.
It turns out it depends on what kind of sweatshirt they're wearing.
Here is the thing.
We ran this at Carnegie Mellon and Pittsburgh.
And at Pittsburgh there are two big universities, Carnegie Mellon and University of Pittsburgh.
All of the subjects sitting in the experiment were Carnegie Mellon students.
When the actor who was getting up was a Carnegie Mellon student -- he was actually a Carnegie Mellon student -- but he was a part of their group, cheating went up.
But when he actually had a University of Pittsburgh sweatshirt, cheating went down.
(Laughter) Now, this is important, because remember, when the moment the student stood up, it made it clear to everybody that they could get away with cheating, because the experimenter said, "You've finished everything. Go home," and they went with the money.
So it wasn't so much about the probability of being caught again.
It was about the norms for cheating.
If somebody from our in-group cheats and we see them cheating, we feel it's more appropriate, as a group, to behave this way.
But if it's somebody from another group, these terrible people -- I mean, not terrible in this -- but somebody we don't want to associate ourselves with, from another university, another group, all of a sudden people's awareness of honesty goes up -- a little bit like The Ten Commandments experiment -- and people cheat even less.
So, what have we learned from this about cheating?
We've learned that a lot of people can cheat.
They cheat just by a little bit.
When we remind people about their morality, they cheat less.
When we get bigger distance from cheating, from the object of money, for example, people cheat more.
And when we see cheating around us, particularly if it's a part of our in-group, cheating goes up.
Now, if we think about this in terms of the stock market, think about what happens.
What happens in a situation when you create something where you pay people a lot of money to see reality in a slightly distorted way?
Would they not be able to see it this way?
Of course they would.
What happens when you do other things, like you remove things from money?
You call them stock, or stock options, derivatives, mortgage-backed securities.
Could it be that with those more distant things, it's not a token for one second, it's something that is many steps removed from money for a much longer time -- could it be that people will cheat even more?
And what happens to the social environment when people see other people behave around them?
I think all of those forces worked in a very bad way in the stock market.
More generally, I want to tell you something about behavioral economics.
We have many intuitions in our life, and the point is that many of these intuitions are wrong.
The question is, are we going to test those intuitions?
We can think about how we're going to test this intuition in our private life, in our business life, and most particularly when it goes to policy, when we think about things like No Child Left Behind, when you create new stock markets, when you create other policies -- taxation, health care and so on.
And the difficulty of testing our intuition was the big lesson I learned when I went back to the nurses to talk to them.
So I went back to talk to them and tell them what I found out about removing bandages.
And I learned two interesting things.
One was that my favorite nurse, Ettie, told me that I did not take her pain into consideration.
She said, "Of course, you know, it was very painful for you.
But think about me as a nurse, taking, removing the bandages of somebody I liked, and had to do it repeatedly over a long period of time.
Creating so much torture was not something that was good for me, too."
And she said maybe part of the reason was it was difficult for her.
But it was actually more interesting than that, because she said, "I did not think that your intuition was right.
I felt my intuition was correct."
So, if you think about all of your intuitions, it's very hard to believe that your intuition is wrong.
And she said, "Given the fact that I thought my intuition was right ..." -- she thought her intuition was right -- it was very difficult for her to accept doing a difficult experiment to try and check whether she was wrong.
But in fact, this is the situation we're all in all the time.
We have very strong intuitions about all kinds of things -- our own ability, how the economy works, how we should pay school teachers.
But unless we start testing those intuitions, we're not going to do better.
And just think about how better my life would have been if these nurses would have been willing to check their intuition, and how everything would have been better if we just start doing more systematic experimentation of our intuitions.
Thank you very much.
I'm a professional troublemaker.
(Laughter) As my job is to critique the world, the shoddy systems and the people who refuse to do better, as a writer, as a speaker, as a shady Nigerian -- (Laughter) I feel like my purpose is to be this cat.
(Laughter) I am the person who is looking at other people, like, "I need you to fix it."
That is me.
I want us to leave this world better than we found it.
And how I choose to effect change is by speaking up, by being the first and by being the domino.
For a line of dominoes to fall, one has to fall first, which then leaves the other choiceless to do the same.
And that domino that falls, we're hoping that, OK, the next person that sees this is inspired to be a domino.
Being the domino, for me, looks like speaking up and doing the things that are really difficult, especially when they are needed, with the hope that others will follow suit.
And here's the thing: I'm the person who says what you might be thinking but dared not to say.
A lot of times people think that we're fearless, the people who do this, we're fearless.
We're not fearless.
We're not unafraid of the consequences or the sacrifices that we have to make by speaking truth to power.
What happens is, we feel like we have to, because there are too few people in the world willing to be the domino, too few people willing to take that fall.
We're not doing it without fear.
Now, let's talk about fear.
I knew exactly what I wanted to be when I grew up.
I was like, "I'm going to be a doctor!"
Doctor Luvvie was the dream.
I was Doc McStuffins before it was a thing.
(Laughter) And I remember when I went to college, my freshman year, I had to take Chemistry 101 for my premed major.
I got the first and last D of my academic career.
(Laughter) So I went to my advisor, and I was like, "OK, let's drop the premed, because this doctor thing is not going to work, because I don't even like hospitals.
So ..."
(Laughter) "Let's just consider that done for."
And that same semester, I started blogging.
That was 2003.
So as that one dream was ending, another was beginning.
And then what was a cute hobby became my full-time job when I lost my marketing job in 2010.
But it still took me two more years to say, "I'm a writer."
Nine years after I had started writing, before I said, "I'm a writer," because I was afraid of what happens without 401ks, without, "How am I going to keep up my shoe habit?
That's important to me."
(Laughter) So it took me that long to own this thing that was what my purpose was.
And then I realized, fear has a very concrete power of keeping us from doing and saying the things that are our purpose.
And I was like, "You know what?
I'm not going to let fear rule my life.
I'm not going to let fear dictate what I do."
And then all of these awesome things started happening, and dominoes started to fall.
So when I realized that, I was like, "OK, 2015, I turned 30, it's going to be my year of 'Do it anyway.' Anything that scares me, I'm going to actively pursue it."
So, I'm a Capricorn.
I like my feel solidly on the ground.
I decided to take my first-ever solo vacation, and it was out of the country to the Dominican Republic.
So on my birthday, what did I do?
I went ziplining through the forests of Punta Cana.
And for some odd reason, I had on business casual.
Don't ask why.
(Laughter) And I had an incredible time.
Also, I don't like being submerged in water.
I like to be, again, on solid ground.
So I went to Mexico and swam with dolphins underwater.
And then the cool thing that I did also that year that was my mountain was I wrote my book, "I'm Judging You: The Do-Better Manual," And I had to own -- (Applause) that whole writing thing now, right?
Yes.
But the very anti-me thing that I did that year that scared the crap out of me -- I went skydiving.
We're about to fall out of the plane.
I was like, "I've done some stupid things in life. This is one of them."
(Laughter) And then we come falling down to Earth, and I literally lose my breath as I see Earth, and I was like, "I just fell out of a perfectly good plane on purpose."
(Laughter) "What is wrong with me?!"
But then I looked down at the beauty, and I was like, "This is the best thing I could have done.
This was an amazing decision."
And I think about the times when I have to speak truth.
It feels like I am falling out of that plane.
It feels like that moment when I'm at the edge of the plane, and I'm like, "You shouldn't do this," but then I do it anyway, because I realize I have to.
Sitting at the edge of that plane and kind of staying on that plane is comfort to me.
And I feel like every day that I'm speaking truth against institutions and people who are bigger than me and just forces that are more powerful than me, I feel like I'm falling out of that plane.
But I realize comfort is overrated.
Because being quiet is comfortable.
Keeping things the way they've been is comfortable.
And all comfort has done is maintain the status quo.
So we've got to get comfortable with being uncomfortable by speaking these hard truths when they're necessary.
And I -- (Applause) And for me, though, I realize that I have to speak these truths, because honesty is so important to me.
My integrity is something I hold dear.
Justice -- I don't think justice should be an option.
We should always have justice.
Also, I believe in shea butter as a core value, and -- (Laughter) and I think the world would be better if we were more moisturized.
But besides that, with these as my core values, I have to speak the truth.
But people like me, the professional troublemakers, should not be the only ones who are committed to being these dominoes who are always falling out of planes or being the first one to take this hit.
People are so afraid of these acute consequences, not realizing that there are many times when we walk in rooms and we are some of the most powerful people in those rooms -- we might be the second-most powerful, third-most powerful.
And I firmly believe that our job in those times is to disrupt what is happening.
And then if we're not the most powerful, if two more of us band together, it makes us powerful.
It's like cosigning the woman in the meeting, you know, the woman who can't seem to get her word out, or just making sure that other person who can't make a point is being heard.
Our job is to make sure they have room for that.
Everyone's well-being is community business.
If we made that a point, we'd understand that, for the times when we need help, we wouldn't have to look around so hard if we made sure we were somebody else's help.
And there are times when I feel like I have taken very public tumbles and falls, like the time when I was asked to speak at a conference, and they wanted me to pay my way there.
And then I did some research and found out the white men who spoke there got compensated and got their travel paid for.
The white women who spoke there got their travel paid for.
The black women who spoke there were expected to actually pay to speak there.
And I was like, "What do I do?"
And I knew that if I spoke up about this publicly, I could face financial loss.
But then I also understood that my silence serves no one.
So I fearfully spoke up about it publicly, and other women started coming out to talk about, "I, too, have faced this type of pay inequality."
And it started a conversation about discriminatory pay practices that this conference was participating in.
I felt like I was the domino the time I read a disturbing memoir by a public figure and wrote a piece about it.
I knew this person was more powerful than me and could impact my career, but I was like, "I've got to do this.
And I did. And I pressed "Publish," and I ran away.
(Laughter) And I came back to a viral post and people being like, "Oh my God, I'm so glad somebody finally said this."
And it started a conversation about mental health and self-care, and I was like, "OK. Alright.
This thing that I'm doing, I guess, alright, it's doing something."
And then so many people have been the domino when they talk about how they've been assaulted by powerful men.
And it's made millions of women join in and say, "Me Too."
So, a shout-out to Tarana Burke for igniting that movement.
(Applause) People and systems count on our silence to keep us exactly where we are.
Now, being the domino sometimes comes down to being exactly who you are.
So, I've been a shady somebody since I was three.
(Laughter) This is me on my third birthday.
But I've been this girl all my life, and I feel like even that's been the domino, because in a world that wants us to walk around as representatives of ourselves, being yourself can be a revolutionary act.
And in a world that wants us to whisper, I choose to yell.
(Applause) When it's time to say these hard things, I ask myself three things.
One: Did you mean it?
Two: Can you defend it?
Three: Did you say it with love?
If the answer is yes to all three, I say it and let the chips fall.
That's important.
That checkpoint with myself always tells me, "Yes, you're supposed to do this."
Telling the truth -- telling thoughtful truths -- should not be a revolutionary act.
Speaking truths to power should not be sacrificial, but they are.
But I think if more of us chose to do this for the greater good, we'd be in better spaces than we are right now.
Speaking of the greater good, I think we commit ourselves to telling truths to build bridges to common ground, and bridges that aren't based on truth will collapse.
So it is our job, it is our obligation, it is our duty to speak truth to power, to be the domino, not just when it's difficult -- especially when it's difficult.
Thank you.
(Applause)
About four years ago, the New Yorker published an article about a cache of dodo bones that was found in a pit on the island of Mauritius.
Now, the island of Mauritius is a small island off the east coast of Madagascar in the Indian Ocean, and it is the place where the dodo bird was discovered and extinguished, all within about 150 years.
Everyone was very excited about this archaeological find, because it meant that they might finally be able to assemble a single dodo skeleton.
See, while museums all over the world have dodo skeletons in their collection, nobody -- not even the actual Natural History Museum on the island of Mauritius -- has a skeleton that's made from the bones of a single dodo.
Well, this isn't exactly true.
The fact is, is that the British Museum had a complete specimen of a dodo in their collection up until the 18th century -- it was actually mummified, skin and all -- but in a fit of space-saving zeal, they actually cut off the head and they cut off the feet and they burned the rest in a bonfire.
If you go look at their website today, they'll actually list these specimens, saying, the rest was lost in a fire.
Not quite the whole truth. Anyway.
The frontispiece of this article was this photo, and I'm one of the people that thinks that Tina Brown was great for bringing photos to the New Yorker, because this photo completely rocked my world.
I became obsessed with the object -- not just the beautiful photograph itself, and the color, the shallow depth of field, the detail that's visible, the wire you can see on the beak there that the conservator used to put this skeleton together -- there's an entire story here.
And I thought to myself, wouldn't it be great if I had my own dodo skeleton?
(Laughter) I want to point out here at this point that I've spent my life obsessed by objects and the stories that they tell, and this was the very latest one.
So I began looking around for -- to see if anyone sold a kit, some kind of model that I could get, and I found lots of reference material, lots of lovely pictures.
No dice: no dodo skeleton for me. But the damage had been done.
I had saved a few hundred photos of dodo skeletons into my "Creative Projects" folder -- it's a repository for my brain, everything that I could possibly be interested in.
Any time I have an internet connection, there's a sluice of stuff moving into there, everything from beautiful rings to cockpit photos.
The key that the Marquis du Lafayette sent to George Washington to celebrate the storming of the Bastille.
Russian nuclear launch key: The one on the top is the picture of the one I found on eBay; the one on the bottom is the one I made for myself, because I couldn't afford the one on eBay.
Storm trooper costumes. Maps of Middle Earth -- that's one I hand-drew myself. There's the dodo skeleton folder.
This folder has 17,000 photos -- over 20 gigabytes of information -- and it's growing constantly.
And one day, a couple of weeks later, it might have been maybe a year later, I was in the art store with my kids, and I was buying some clay tools -- we were going to have a craft day.
I bought some Super Sculpeys, some armature wire, some various materials.
And I looked down at this Sculpey, and I thought, maybe, yeah, maybe I could make my own dodo skull.
I should point out at this time -- I'm not a sculptor; I'm a hard-edged model maker.
You give me a drawing, you give me a prop to replicate, you give me a crane, scaffolding, parts from "Star Wars" -- especially parts from "Star Wars" -- I can do this stuff all day long.
It's exactly how I made my living for 15 years.
But you give me something like this -- my friend Mike Murnane sculpted this; it's a maquette for "Star Wars, Episode Two" -- this is not my thing -- this is something other people do -- dragons, soft things.
However, I felt like I had looked at enough photos of dodo skulls to actually be able to understand the topology and perhaps replicate it -- I mean, it couldn't be that difficult.
So, I started looking at the best photos I could find.
I grabbed all the reference, and I found this lovely piece of reference.
This is someone selling this on eBay; it was clearly a womans hand, hopefully a woman's hand.
Assuming it was roughly the size of my wife's hand, I made some measurements of her thumb, and I scaled them out to the size of the skull.
I blew it up to the actual size, and I began using that, along with all the other reference that I had, comparing it to it as size reference for figuring out exactly how big the beak should be, exactly how long, etc.
And over a few hours, I eventually achieved what was actually a pretty reasonable dodo skull. And I didn't mean to continue, I -- it's kind of like, you know, you can only clean a super messy room by picking up one thing at a time; you can't think about the totality.
I wasn't thinking about a dodo skeleton; I just noticed that as I finished this skull, the armature wire that I had been used to holding it up was sticking out of the back just where a spine would be.
And one of the other things I'd been interested in and obsessed with over the years is spines and skeletons, having collected a couple of hundred.
I actually understood the mechanics of vertebrae enough to kind of start to imitate them.
And so button by button, vertebrae by vertebrae, I built my way down.
And actually, by the end of the day, I had a reasonable skull, a moderately good vertebrae and half of a pelvis.
And again, I kept on going, looking for more reference, every bit of reference I could find -- drawings, beautiful photos.
This guy -- I love this guy! He put a dodo leg bones on a scanner with a ruler.
This is the kind of accuracy that I wanted, and I replicated every last bone and put it in.
And after about six weeks, I finished, painted, mounted my own dodo skeleton.
You can see that I even made a museum label for it that includes a brief history of the dodo.
And TAP Plastics made me -- although I didn't photograph it -- a museum vitrine.
I don't have the room for this in my house, but I had to finish what I had started.
And this actually represented kind of a sea change to me.
Again, like I said, my life has been about being fascinated by objects and the stories that they tell, and also making them for myself, obtaining them, appreciating them and diving into them.
And in this folder, "Creative Projects," there are tons of projects that I'm currently working on, projects that I've already worked on, things that I might want to work on some day, and things that I may just want to find and buy and have and look at and touch.
But now there was potentially this new category of things that I could sculpt that was different, that I -- you know, I have my own R2D2, but that's -- honestly, relative to sculpting, to me, that's easy.
And so I went back and looked through my "Creative Projects" folder, and I happened across the Maltese Falcon.
Now, this is funny for me: to fall in love with an object from a Hammett novel, because if it's true that the world is divided into two types of people, Chandler people and Hammett people, I am absolutely a Chandler person.
But in this case, it's not about the author, it's not about the book or the movie or the story, it's about the object in and of itself.
And in this case, this object is -- plays on a host of levels.
First of all, there's the object in the world.
This is the "Kniphausen Hawk."
It is a ceremonial pouring vessel made around 1700 for a Swedish Count, and it is very likely the object from which Hammett drew his inspiration for the Maltese Falcon.
Then there is the fictional bird, the one that Hammett created for the book.
Built out of words, it is the engine that drives the plot of his book and also the movie, in which another object is created: a prop that has to represent the thing that Hammett created out of words, inspired by the Kniphausen Hawk, and this represents the falcon in the movie.
And then there is this fourth level, which is a whole new object in the world: the prop made for the movie, the representative of the thing, becomes, in its own right, a whole other thing, a whole new object of desire.
And so now it was time to do some research.
I actually had done some research a few years before -- it's why the folder was there.
I'd bought a replica, a really crappy replica, of the Maltese Falcon on eBay, and had downloaded enough pictures to actually have some reasonable reference.
But I discovered, in researching further, really wanting precise reference, that one of the original lead birds had been sold at Christie's in 1994, and so I contacted an antiquarian bookseller who had the original Christie's catalogue, and in it I found this magnificent picture, which included a size reference.
I was able to scan the picture, blow it up to exactly full size.
I found other reference. Avi [Ara] Chekmayan, a New Jersey editor, actually found this resin Maltese Falcon at a flea market in 1991, although it took him five years to authenticate this bird to the auctioneers' specifications, because there was a lot of controversy about it.
It was made out of resin, which wasn't a common material for movie props about the time the movie was made.
It's funny to me that it took a while to authenticate it, because I can see it compared to this thing, and I can tell you -- it's real, it's the real thing, it's made from the exact same mold that this one is.
In this one, because the auction was actually so controversial, Profiles in History, the auction house that sold this -- I think in 1995 for about 100,000 dollars -- they actually included -- you can see here on the bottom -- not just a front elevation, but also a side, rear and other side elevation.
So now, I had all the topology I needed to replicate the Maltese Falcon.
What do they do, how do you start something like that? I really don't know.
So what I did was, again, like I did with the dodo skull, I blew all my reference up to full size, and then I began cutting out the negatives and using those templates as shape references.
So I took Sculpey, and I built a big block of it, and I passed it through until, you know, I got the right profiles.
And then slowly, feather by feather, detail by detail, I worked out and achieved -- working in front of the television and Super Sculpey -- here's me sitting next to my wife -- it's the only picture I took of the entire process.
As I moved through, I achieved a very reasonable facsimile of the Maltese Falcon.
But again, I am not a sculptor, and so I don't know a lot of the tricks, like, I don't know how my friend Mike gets beautiful, shiny surfaces with his Sculpey; I certainly wasn't able to get it.
So, I went down to my shop, and I molded it and I cast it in resin, because in the resin, then, I could absolutely get the glass smooth finished.
Now there's a lot of ways to fill and get yourself a nice smooth finish.
My preference is about 70 coats of this -- matte black auto primer.
I spray it on for about three or four days, it drips to hell, but it allows me a really, really nice gentle sanding surface and I can get it glass-smooth.
Oh, finishing up with triple-zero steel wool.
Now, the great thing about getting it to this point was that because in the movie, when they finally bring out the bird at the end, and they place it on the table, they actually spin it.
So I was able to actually screen-shot and freeze-frame to make sure.
And I'm following all the light kicks on this thing and making sure that as I'm holding the light in the same position, I'm getting the same type of reflection on it -- that's the level of detail I'm going into this thing.
I ended up with this: my Maltese Falcon.
And it's beautiful. And I can state with authority at this point in time, when I'd finished it, of all of the replicas out there -- and there is a few -- this is by far the most accurate representation of the original Maltese Falcon than anyone has sculpted. Now the original one, I should tell you, is sculpted by a guy named Fred Sexton.
This is where it gets weird.
Fred Sexton was a friend of this guy, George Hodel.
Terrifying guy -- agreed by many to be the killer of the Black Dahlia.
Now, James Ellroy believes that Fred Sexton, the sculptor of the Maltese Falcon, killed James Elroy's mother.
I'll go you one stranger than that: In 1974, during the production of a weird comedy sequel to "The Maltese Falcon," called "The Black Bird," starring George Segal, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art had a plaster original of the Maltese Falcon -- one of the original six plasters, I think, made for the movie -- stolen out of the museum. A lot of people thought it was a publicity stunt for the movie.
John's Grill, which actually is seen briefly in "The Maltese Falcon," is still a viable San Francisco eatery, counted amongst its regular customers Elisha Cook, who played Wilmer Cook in the movie, and he gave them one of his original plasters of the Maltese Falcon.
And they had it in their cabinet for about 15 years, until it got stolen in January of 2007.
It would seem that the object of desire only comes into its own by disappearing repeatedly.
So here I had this Falcon, and it was lovely. It looked really great, the light worked on it really well, it was better than anything that I could achieve or obtain out in the world.
But there was a problem. And the problem was that: I wanted the entirety of the object, I wanted the weight behind the object.
This thing was made of resin and it was too light.
There's this group online that I frequent.
It's a group of prop crazies just like me called the Replica Props Forum, and it's people who trade, make and travel in information about movie props.
And it turned out that one of the guys there, a friend of mine that I never actually met, but befriended through some prop deals, was the manager of a local foundry.
He took my master Falcon pattern, he actually did lost wax casting in bronze for me, and this is the bronze I got back.
And this is, after some acid etching, the one that I ended up with.
And this thing, it's deeply, deeply satisfying to me.
Here, I'm going to put it out there, later on tonight, and I want you to pick it up and handle it.
You want to know how obsessed I am. This project's only for me, and yet I went so far as to buy on eBay a 1941 Chinese San Francisco-based newspaper, in order so that the bird could properly be wrapped ...
like it is in the movie.
(Laughter) Yeah, I know!
(Laughter) (Applause) There you can see, it's weighing in at 27 and a half pounds.
That's half the weight of my dog, Huxley.
But there's a problem.
Now, here's the most recent progression of Falcons.
On the far left is a piece of crap -- a replica I bought on eBay.
There's my somewhat ruined Sculpey Falcon, because I had to get it back out of the mold. There's my first casting, there's my master and there's my bronze.
There's a thing that happens when you mold and cast things, which is that every time you throw it into silicone and cast it in resin, you lose a little bit of volume, you lose a little bit of size.
And when I held my bronze one up against my Sculpey one, it was shorter by three-quarters of an inch.
Yeah, no, really, this was like aah -- why didn't I remember this?
Why didn't I start and make it bigger?
So what do I do? I figure I have two options.
One, I can fire a freaking laser at it, which I have already done, to do a 3D scan -- there's a 3D scan of this Falcon.
I had figured out the exact amount of shrinkage I achieved going from a wax master to a bronze master and blown this up big enough to make a 3D lithography master of this, which I will polish, then I will send to the mold maker and then I will have it done in bronze. Or: There are several people who own originals, and I have been attempting to contact them and reach them, hoping that they will let me spend a few minutes in the presence of one of the real birds, maybe to take a picture, or even to pull out the hand-held laser scanner that I happen to own that fits inside a cereal box, and could maybe, without even touching their bird, I swear, get a perfect 3D scan. And I'm even willing to sign pages saying that I'll never let anyone else have it, except for me in my office, I promise.
I'll give them one if they want it.
And then, maybe, then I'll achieve the end of this exercise.
But really, if we're all going to be honest with ourselves, I have to admit that achieving the end of the exercise was never the point of the exercise to begin with, was it.
Thank you.
I've been a political cartoonist on the global stage for the last 20 years.
Hey, we have seen a lot of things happen in those 20 years.
We saw three different Catholic popes, and we witnessed that unique moment: the election of a pope on St. Peter's Square -- you know, the little white smoke and the official announcement.
[It's a boy!] (Laughter) (Applause) We saw four American presidents.
Obama, of course.
Oh, Europeans liked him a lot.
He was a multilateralist.
He favored diplomacy.
He wanted to be friends with Iran.
(Laughter) And then ...
reality imitated caricature the day Donald Trump became the President of the United States of America.
(Laughter) (Applause) You know, people come to us and they say, "It's too easy for you cartoonists. I mean -- with people like Trump?"
Well, no, it's not easy to caricature a man who is himself a caricature.
(Laughter) No.
(Applause) Populists are no easy target for satire because you try to nail them down one day, and the next day, they outdo you.
For example, as soon as he was elected, I tried to imagine the tweet that Trump would send on Christmas Eve.
So I did this, OK?
[Merry Christmas to all! Except all those pathetic losers. So sad.] (Laughter) And basically, the next day, Trump tweeted this: [Happy New Year to all, including to my many enemies and those who have fought me and lost so badly they just don't know what to do. Love!] (Laughter) It's the same!
(Applause) This is the era of strongmen.
And soon, Donald Trump was able to meet his personal hero, Vladimir Putin, and this is how the first meeting went: [I'll help you find the hackers. Give me your password.] (Laughter) And I'm not inventing anything.
He came out of that first meeting saying that the two of them had agreed on a joint task force on cybersecurity.
This is true, if you do remember.
Oh, who would have imagined the things we saw over these 20 years.
We saw Great Britain run towards a European Union exit.
[Hard Brexit?] (Laughter) In the Middle East, we believed for a while in the democratic miracle of the Arab Spring.
We saw dictators fall, we saw others hang on.
(Laughter) And then there is the timeless Kim dynasty of North Korea.
These guys seem to be coming straight out of Cartoon Network.
I was blessed to be able to draw two of them.
Kim Jong-il, the father, when he died a few years ago, that was a very dangerous moment.
[That was close!] (Laughter) That was -- (Applause) And then the son, Kim Jong-un, proved himself a worthy successor to the throne.
He's now friends with the US president.
They meet each other all the time, and they talk like friends.
[What kind of hair gel?] (Laughter) Should we be surprised to be living in a world ruled by egomaniacs?
What if they were just a reflection of ourselves?
I mean, look at us, each of us.
(Laughter) Yeah, we love our smartphones; we love our selfies; we love ourselves.
And thanks to Facebook, we have a lot of friends all over the world.
Mark Zuckerberg is our friend.
(Laughter) You know, he and his peers in Silicon Valley are the kings and the emperors of our time.
Showing that the emperors have no clothes, that's the task of satire, right?
Speaking truth to power.
This has always been the historical role of political cartooning.
In the 1830s, postrevolutionary France under King Louis Philippe, journalists and caricaturists fought hard for the freedom of the press.
They were jailed, they were fined, but they prevailed.
And this caricature of the king by Daumier came to define the monarch.
It marked history.
It became the timeless symbol of satire triumphing over autocracy.
Today, 200 years after Daumier, are political cartoons at risk of disappearing?
Take this blank space on the front page of Turkish opposition newspaper "Cumhuriyet."
This is where Musa Kart's cartoon used to appear.
In 2018, Musa Kart was sentenced to three years in jail.
For doing what?
For doing political cartoons in Erdoan's Turkey.
Cartoonists from Venezuela, Russia, Syria have been forced into exile.
Look at this image.
It seems so innocent, right?
Yet it is so provocative.
When he posted this image, Hani Abbas knew it would change his life.
It was in 2012, and the Syrians were taking to the streets.
Of course, the little red flower is the symbol of the Syrian revolution.
So pretty soon, the regime was after him, and he had to flee the country.
A good friend of his, cartoonist Akram Raslan, didn't make it out of Syria.
He died under torture.
In the United States of America recently, some of the very top cartoonists, like Nick Anderson and Rob Rogers -- this is a cartoon by Rob -- [Memorial Day 2018. (on tombstone) Truth. Honor. Rule of Law.] they lost their positions because their publishers found their work too critical of Trump.
And the same happened to Canadian cartoonist Michael de Adder.
Hey, maybe we should start worrying.
Political cartoons were born with democracy, and they are challenged when freedom is.
You know, over the years, with the Cartooning for Peace Foundation and other initiatives, Kofi Annan -- this is not well known -- he was the honorary chair of our foundation, the late Kofi Annan, Nobel Peace Laureate.
He was a great defender of cartoons.
Or, on the board of the Association of American Editorial Cartoonists, we have advocated on behalf of jailed, threatened, fired, exiled cartoonists.
But I never saw a case of someone losing his job over a cartoon he didn't do.
Well, that happened to me.
For the last 20 years, I have been with the "International Herald Tribune" and the "New York Times."
Then something happened.
In April 2019, a cartoon by a famous Portuguese cartoonist, which was first published in a newspaper "El Expresso" in Lisbon, was picked by an editor at the "New York Times" and reprinted in the international editions.
This thing blew up.
It was denounced as anti-Semitic, triggered widespread outrage, apologies and a lot of damage control by the Times.
A month after, my editor told me they were ending political cartoons altogether.
So we could, and we should, have a discussion about that cartoon.
Some people say it reminds them of the worst anti-Semitic propaganda.
Others, including in Israel, say no, it's just a harsh criticism of Trump, who is shown as blindly following the Prime Minister of Israel.
I have some issues with this cartoon, but that discussion did not happen at the "New York Times."
Under attack, they took the easiest path: in order to not have problems with political cartoons in the future, let's not have any at all.
Hey, this is new.
Did we just invent preventive self-censorship?
I think this is bigger than cartoons.
This is about opinion and journalism.
This, in the end, is about democracy.
We now live in a world where moralistic mobs gather on social media and rise like a storm.
The most outraged voices tend to define the conversation, and the angry crowd follows in.
These social media mobs, sometimes fueled by interest groups, fall upon newsrooms in an overwhelming blow.
They send publishers and editors scrambling for countermeasures.
This leaves no room for meaningful discussions.
Twitter is a place for fury, not for debate.
And you know what?
Someone described pretty well our human condition in this noisy age.
You know who?
Shakespeare, 400 years ago.
["(Life is) a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing."] This speaks to me. Shakespeare is still very relevant, no?
But the world has changed a bit.
[Too long!] (Laughter) It's true.
(Applause) You know, social media is both a blessing and a curse for cartoons.
This is the era of the image, so they get shared, they get viral, but that also makes them a prime target.
More than often, the real target behind the cartoon is the media that published it.
[Covering Iraq? No, Trump!] That relationship between traditional media and social media is a funny one.
On one hand, you have the time-consuming process of information, verification, curation.
On the other hand, it's an open buffet, frankly, for rumors, opinions, emotions, amplified by algorithms.
Even quality newspapers mimic the codes of social networks on their websites.
They highlight the 10 most read, the 10 most shared stories.
They should put forward the 10 most important stories.
(Applause) The media must not be intimidated by social media, and editors should stop being afraid of the angry mob.
(Applause) We're not going to put up warnings the way we do on cigarette packs, are we?
[Satire can hurt your feelings] (Laughter) Come on.
[Under your burkini you could be hiding a sex bomb] Political cartoons are meant to provoke, just like opinions.
But before all, they are meant to be thought-provoking.
You feel hurt?
Just let it go.
You don't like it?
Look the other way.
Freedom of expression is not incompatible with dialogue and listening to each other.
But it is incompatible with intolerance.
(Applause) Let us not become our own censors in the name of political correctness.
We need to stand up, we need to push back, because if we don't, we will wake up tomorrow in a sanitized world, where any form of satire and political cartooning becomes impossible.
Because, when political pressure meets political correctness, freedom of speech perishes.
(Applause) Do you remember January 2015?
With the massacre of journalists and cartoonists at "Charlie Hebdo" in Paris, we discovered the most extreme form of censorship: murder.
Remember how it felt.
[Without humor we are all dead] Whatever one thought of that satirical magazine, however one felt about those particular cartoons, we all sensed that something fundamental was at stake, that citizens of free societies -- actually, citizens of any society -- need humor as much as the air we breathe.
This is why the extremists, the dictators, the autocrats and, frankly, all the ideologues of the world cannot stand humor.
In the insane world we live in right now, we need political cartoons more than ever.
And we need humor.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A few dozen hours can affect the outcome of whole lifetimes/ And that when they do, those few dozen hours, like the salvaged remains of a burned clock must be resurrected from the ruins and examined. This is the premise of Arundhati Roys 1997 novel "The God of Small Things."
Set in a town in Kerala, India called Ayemenem, the story revolves around fraternal twins Rahel and Estha, who are separated for 23 years after the fateful few dozen hours in which their cousin drowns, their mothers illicit affair is revealed, and her lover is murdered.
While the book is set at the point of Rahel and Esthas reunion, the narrative takes place mostly in the past, reconstructing the details around the tragic events that led to their separation.
Roys rich language and masterful storytelling earned her the prestigious Booker prize for "The God of Small Things."
In the novel, she interrogates the culture of her native India, including its social mores and colonial history.
One of her focuses is the caste system, a way of classifying people by hereditary social class that is thousands of years old.
By the mid-20th century, the original four castes associated with specific occupations had been divided into some 3000 sub-castes.
Though the caste system was Constitutionally abolished in 1950, it continued to shape social life in India, routinely marginalizing people of lower castes.
In the novel, Rahel and Estha have a close relationship with Velutha, a worker in their familys pickle factory and member of the so-called untouchable caste.
When Velutha and the twins mother, Ammu, embark on an affair, they violate what Roy describes as the love laws forbidding intimacy between different castes.
Roy warns that the tragic consequences of their relationship would lurk forever in ordinary things, like coat hangers, the tar on roads, and the absence of words. Roys writing makes constant use of these ordinary things, bringing lush detail to even the most tragic moments.
The book opens at the funeral of the twins half-British cousin Sophie after her drowning.
As the family mourns, lilies curl and crisp in the hot church.
A baby bat crawls up a funeral sari.
Tears drip from a chin like raindrops from a roof.
The novel forays into the past to explore the characters struggles to operate in a world where they dont quite fit, alongside their nations political turmoil.
Ammu struggles not to lash out at her beloved children when she feels particularly trapped in her parents small-town home, where neighbors judge and shun her for being divorced.
Velutha, meanwhile, balances his affair with Ammu and friendship with the twins not only with his employment to their family, but also with his membership to a budding communist countermovement to Indira Ghandis Green Revolution. In the 1960s, the misleadingly named Green Revolution introduced chemical fertilizers and pesticides and the damming of rivers to India.
While these policies produced high-yield crops that staved off famine, they also forced people from lower castes off their land and caused widespread environmental damage.
When the twins return to Ayemenem as adults, the consequences of the Green Revolution are all around them.
The river that was bursting with life in their childhood greets them with a ghastly skulls smile, with holes where teeth had been, and a limp hand raised from a hospital bed. As Roy probes the depths of human experience, she never loses sight of the way her characters are shaped by the time and the place where they live.
In the world of "The God of Small Things," Various kinds of despair competed for primacy personal despair could never be desperate enough...
personal turmoil dropped by at the wayside shrine of the vast, violent, circling, driving, ridiculous, insane, unfeasible public turmoil of a nation.
Yogi Berra, a US baseball player and philosopher, said, "If we don't know where we're going, we might not get there."
Accumulating scientific knowledge is giving us greater insights, greater clarity, into what our future might look like in a changing climate and what that could mean for our health.
I'm here to talk about a related aspect, on how our emissions of greenhouse gases from burning of fossil fuels is reducing the nutritional quality of our food.
We'll start with the food pyramid.
You all know the food pyramid.
We all need to eat a balanced diet.
We need to get proteins, we need to get micronutrients, we need to get vitamins.
And so, this is a way for us to think about how to make sure we get what we need every day so we can grow and thrive.
But we eat not just because we need to, we also eat for enjoyment.
Bread, pasta, pizza -- there's a whole range of foods that are culturally important.
We enjoy eating these.
And so they're important for our diet, but they're also important for our cultures.
Carbon dioxide has been increasing since the start of the Industrial Revolution, increasing from about 280 parts per million to over 410 today, and it continues to increase.
The carbon that plants need to grow comes from this carbon dioxide.
They bring it into the plant, they break it apart into the carbon itself, and they use that to grow.
They also need nutrients from the soil.
And so yes, carbon dioxide is plant food.
And this should be good news, of rising carbon dioxide concentrations, for food security around the world, making sure that people get enough to eat every day.
About 820 million people in the world don't get enough to eat every day.
So there's a fair amount written about how higher CO2 is going to help with our food security problem.
We need to accelerate our progress in agricultural productivity to feed the nine to 10 billion people who will be alive in 2050 and to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly the Goal Number 2, that is on reducing food insecurity, increasing nutrition, increasing access to the foods that we need for everyone.
We know that climate change is affecting agricultural productivity.
The earth has warmed about one degree centigrade since preindustrial times.
That is changing local temperature and precipitation patterns, and that has consequences for the agricultural productivity in many parts of the world.
And it's not just local changes in temperature and precipitation, it's the extremes.
Extremes in terms of heat waves, floods and droughts are significantly affecting productivity.
And that carbon dioxide, besides making plants grow, has other consequences as well, that plants, when they have higher carbon dioxide, increase the synthesis of carbohydrates, sugars and starches, and they decrease the concentrations of protein and critical nutrients.
And this is very important for how we think about food security going forward.
A couple of nights ago in the table talks on climate change, someone said that they're a five-sevenths optimist: that they're an optimist five days of the week, and this is a topic for the other two days.
When we think about micronutrients, almost all of them are affected by higher CO2 concentrations.
Two in particular are iron and zinc.
When you don't have enough iron, you can develop iron deficiency anemia.
It's associated with fatigue, shortness of breath and some fairly serious consequences as well.
When you don't have enough zinc, you can have a loss of appetite.
It is a significant problem around the world.
There's about one billion people who are zinc deficient.
It's very important for maternal and child health.
It affects development.
The B vitamins are critical for a whole range of reasons.
They help convert our food into energy.
They're important for the functions of many of the physiologic activities in our bodies.
And when you have higher carbon in a plant, you have less nitrogen, and you have less B vitamins.
And it's not just us.
Cattle are already being affected because the quality of their forage is declining.
In fact, this affects every consumer of plants.
And give a thought to, for example, our pet cats and dogs.
If you look on the label of most of the pet and dog food, there's a significant amount of grain in those foods.
So this affects everyone.
How do we know that this is a problem?
We know from field studies and we know from experimental studies in laboratories.
In the field studies -- and I'll focus primarily on wheat and on rice -- there's fields, for example, of rice that are divided into different plots.
And the plots are all the same: the soil's the same, the precipitation's the same -- everything's the same.
Except carbon dioxide is blown over some of the plots.
And so you can compare what it looks like under today's conditions and under carbon dioxide conditions later in the century.
I was part of one of the few studies that have done this.
We looked at 18 rice lines in China and in Japan and grew them under conditions that you would expect later in the century.
And when you look at the results, the white bar is today's conditions, the red bar is conditions later in the century.
So protein declines about 10 percent, iron about eight percent, zinc about five percent.
These don't sound like really big changes, but when you start thinking about the poor in every country who primarily eat starch, that this will put people who are on the edge over the edge into frank deficiencies, creating all kinds of health problems.
The situation is more significant for the B vitamins.
When you look at vitamin B1 and vitamin B2, there's about a 17 percent decline.
Pantothenic acid, vitamin B5, is about a 13 percent decline.
Folate is about a 30 percent decline.
And these are averages over the various experiments that were done.
Folate is critical for child development.
Pregnant women who don't get enough folate are at much higher risk of having babies with birth defects.
So these are very serious potential consequences for our health as CO2 continues to rise.
In another example, this is modeling work that was done by Chris Weyant and his colleagues, taking a look at this chain from higher CO2 to lower iron and zinc -- and they only looked at iron and zinc -- to various health outcomes.
They looked at malaria, diarrheal disease, pneumonia, iron deficiency anemia, and looked at what the consequences could be in 2050.
And the darker the color in this, the larger the consequences.
So you can see the major impacts in Asia and in Africa, but also note that in countries such as the United States and countries in Europe, the populations also could be affected.
They estimated about 125 million people could be affected.
They also modeled what would be the most effective interventions, and their conclusion was reducing our greenhouse gases: getting our greenhouse gas emissions down by mid-century so we don't have to worry so much about these consequences later in the century.
These experiments, these modeling studies did not take climate change itself into account.
They just focused on the carbon dioxide component.
So when you put the two together, it's expected the impact is much larger than what I've told you.
I'd love to be able to tell you right now how much the food you had for breakfast, the food you're going to have for lunch, has shifted from what your grandparents ate in terms of its nutritional quality.
But I can't.
We don't have the research on that.
I'd love to tell you how much current food insecurity is affected by these changes.
But I can't.
We don't have the research on that, either.
There's a lot that needs to be known in this area, including what the possible solutions could be.
We don't know exactly what those solutions are, but we've got a range of options.
We've got advancements in technologies.
We've got plant breeding. We've got biofortification.
Soils could make a difference.
And, of course, it will be very helpful to know how these changes could affect our future health and the health of our children and the health of our grandchildren.
And these investments take time.
It will take time to sort all of these issues out.
There is no national entity or business group that is funding this research.
We need these investments critically so that we do know where we're going.
In the meantime, what we can do is ensure that all people have access to a complete diet, not just those in the wealthy parts of the world but everywhere in the world.
We also individually and collectively need to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions to reduce the challenges that will come later in the century.
It's been said that if you think education is expensive, try ignorance.
Let's not.
Let's invest in ourselves, in our children and in our planet.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I don't know what the hell I'm doing here.
I was born in a Scots Presbyterian ghetto in Canada, and dropped out of high school. I don't own a cell phone, and I paint on paper using gouache, which hasn't changed in 600 years.
But about three years ago I had an art show in New York, and I titled it "Serious Nonsense."
So I think I'm actually the first one here -- I lead.
I called it "Serious Nonsense" because on the serious side, I use a technique of painstaking realism of editorial illustration from when I was a kid. I copied it and I never unlearned it -- it's the only style I know. And it's very kind of staid and formal.
And meanwhile, I use nonsense, as you can see.
This is a Scottish castle where people are playing golf indoors, and the trick was to bang the golf ball off of suits of armor -- which you can't see there.
This was one of a series called "Zany Afternoons," which became a book.
This is a home-built rocket-propelled car. That's a 1953 Henry J -- I'm a bug for authenticity -- in a quiet neighborhood in Toledo.
This is my submission for the L.A. Museum of Film.
You can probably tell Frank Gehry and I come from the same town.
My work is so personal and so strange that I have to invent my own lexicon for it.
And I work a lot in what I call "retrofuturism," which is looking back to see how yesterday viewed tomorrow.
And they're always wrong, always hilariously, optimistically wrong.
And the peak time for that was the 30s, because the Depression was so dismal that anything to get away from the present into the future ...
and technology was going to carry us along.
This is Popular Workbench. Popular science magazines in those days -- I had a huge collection of them from the '30s -- all they are is just poor people being asked to make sunglasses out of wire coat hangers and everything improvised and dreaming about these wonderful giant radio robots playing ice hockey at 300 miles an hour -- it's all going to happen, it's all going to be wonderful.
Automotive retrofuturism is one of my specialties.
I was both an automobile illustrator and an advertising automobile copywriter, so I have a lot of revenge to take on the subject.
Detroit has always been halfway into the future -- the advertising half.
This is the '58 Bulgemobile: so new, they make tomorrow look like yesterday.
This is a chain gang of guys admiring the car.
That's from a whole catalog -- it's 18 pages or so -- ran back in the days of the Lampoon, where I cut my teeth.
Techno-archaeology is digging back and finding past miracles that never happened -- for good reason, usually.
The zeppelin -- this was from a brochure about the zeppelin based, obviously, on the Hindenburg.
But the zeppelin was the biggest thing that ever moved made by man.
And it carried 56 people at the speed of a Buick at an altitude you could hear dogs bark, and it cost twice as much as a first-class cabin on the Normandie to fly it.
So the Hindenburg wasn't, you know, it was inevitable it was going to go.
This is auto-gyro jousting in Malibu in the 30s.
The auto-gyro couldn't wait for the invention of the helicopter, but it should have -- it wasn't a big success.
It's the only Spanish innovation, technologically, of the 20th century, by the way.
You needed to know that.
The flying car which never got off the ground -- it was a post-war dream.
My old man used to tell me we were going to get a flying car.
This is pitched into the future from 1946, looking at the day all American families have them.
"There's Moscow, Shirley. Hope they speak Esperanto!"
Faux-nostalgia, which I'm sort of -- not, say, famous for, but I work an awful lot in it.
It's the achingly sentimental yearning for times that never happened.
Somebody once said that nostalgia is the one utterly most useless human emotion -- so I think thats a case for serious play.
This is emblematic of it -- this is wing dining, recalling those balmy summer days somewhere over France in the 20s, dining on the wing of a plane. You can't see it very well here, but that's Hemingway reading some pages from his new novel to Fitzgerald and Ford Madox Ford until the slipstream blows him away.
This is tank polo in the South Hamptons.
The brainless rich are more fun to make fun of than anybody. I do a lot of that.
And authenticity is a major part of my serious nonsense.
I think it adds a huge amount.
Those, for example, are Mark IV British tanks from 1916.
They had two machine guns and a cannon, and they had 90 horsepower Ricardo engines.
They went five miles an hour and inside it was 105 degrees in the pitch dark.
And they had a canary hung inside the thing to make sure the Germans weren't going to use gas.
Happy little story, isn't it?
This is Motor Ritz Towers in Manhattan in the 30s, where you drove up to your front door, if you had the guts.
Anybody who was anybody had an apartment there.
I managed to stick in both the zeppelin and an ocean liner out of sheer enthusiasm.
And I love cigars -- there's a cigar billboard down there.
And faux-nostalgia works even in serious subjects like war.
This is those wonderful days of the Battle of Britain in 1940, when a Messerschmitt ME109 bursts into the House of Commons and buzzes around, just to piss off Churchill, who's down there somewhere.
It's a fond memory of times past.
Hyperbolic overkill is a way of taking exaggeration to the absolute ultimate limit, just for the fun of it. This was a piece I did -- a brochure again -- "RMS Tyrannic: The Biggest Thing in All the World."
The copy, which you can't see because it goes on and on for several pages, says that steerage passengers can't get their to bunks before the voyage is over, and it's so safe it carries no insurance.
It's obviously modeled on the Titanic.
But it's not a cri de coeur about man's hubris in the face of the elements.
It's just a sick, silly joke.
Shamelessly cheap is something, I think -- this will wake you up.
It has no meaning, just -- Desoto discovers the Mississippi, and it's a Desoto discovering the Mississippi.
I did that as a quick back page -- I had like four hours to do a back page for an issue of the Lampoon, and I did that, and I thought, "Well, I'm ashamed. I hope nobody knows it."
People wrote in for reprints of that thing.
Urban absurdism -- that's what the New Yorker really calls for.
I try to make life in New York look even weirder than it is with those covers.
I've done about 40 of them, and I'd say 30 of them are based on that concept.
I was driving down 7th Avenue one night at 3 a.m., and this steam pouring out of the street, and I thought, "What causes that?" And that -- whos to say?
The Temple of Dendur at the Metropolitan in New York -- it's a very somber place.
I thought I could jazz it up a bit, have a little fun with it.
This is a very un-PC cover. Not in New York.
I couldn't resist, and I got a nasty email from some environmental group saying, "This is too serious and solemn to make fun of. You should be ashamed, please apologize on our website."
Haven't got around to it yet but -- I may.
This is the word side of my brain.
(Laughter) I love the word "Eurotrash."
(Laughter) That's all the Eurotrash coming through JFK customs.
This was the New York bike messenger meeting the Tour de France.
If you live in New York, you know how the bike messengers move.
Except that he's carrying a tube for blueprints and stuff -- they all do -- and a lot of people thought that meant it was a terrorist about to shoot rockets at the Tour de France -- sign of our times, I guess.
This is the only fashion cover I've ever done.
It's the little old lady that lives in a shoe, and then this thing -- the title of that was, "There Goes the Neighborhood."
I don't know a hell of a lot about fashion -- I was told to do what they call a Mary Jane, and then I got into this terrible fight between the art director and the editor saying: "Put a strap on it" -- "No, don't put a strap on it" -- "Put a strap on it -- "Don't put a strap on it" -- because it obscures the logo and looks terrible and it's bad and -- I finally chickened out and did it for the sake of the authenticity of the shoe.
This is a tiny joke -- E-ZR pass. One letter makes an idea.
This is a big joke.
This is the audition for "King Kong."
(Laughter) People always ask me, where do you get your ideas, how do your ideas come?
Truth about that one is I had a horrible red wine hangover, in the middle of the night, this came to me like a Xerox -- all I had to do was write it down.
It was perfectly clear. I didn't do any thinking about it.
And then when it ran, a lovely lady, an old lady named Mrs. Edgar Rosenberg -- if you know that name -- called me and said she loved the cover, it was so sweet.
Her former name was Fay Wray, and so that was -- I didn't have the wit to say, "Take the painting."
Finally, this was a three-page cover, never done before, and I don't think it will ever be done again -- successive pages in the front of the magazine.
It's the ascent of man using an escalator, and it's in three parts.
You can't see it all together, unfortunately, but if you look at it enough, you can sort of start to see how it actually starts to move.
(Applause) Pretty elegant. Nothing like a crash to end a joke. That completes my oeuvre.
I would just like to add a crass commercial -- I have a kids' book coming out in the fall called "Marvel Sandwiches," a compendium of all the serious play that ever was, and its going to be available in fine bookstores, crummy bookstores, tables on the street in October.
So thank you very much.
I'm going to present three projects in rapid fire.
I don't have much time to do it.
And I want to reinforce three ideas with that rapid-fire presentation.
The first is what I like to call a hyper-rational process.
It's a process that takes rationality almost to an absurd level, and it transcends all the baggage that normally comes with what people would call, sort of a rational conclusion to something.
And it concludes in something that you see here, that you actually wouldn't expect as being the result of rationality.
The second -- the second is that this process does not have a signature.
There is no authorship.
Architects are obsessed with authorship.
This is something that has editing and it has teams, but in fact, we no longer see within this process, the traditional master architect creating a sketch that his minions carry out.
And the third is that it challenges -- and this is, in the length of this, very hard to support why, connect all these things -- but it challenges the high modernist notion of flexibility.
High modernists said we will create sort of singular spaces that are generic, almost anything can happen within them.
I call it sort of "shotgun flexibility" -- turn your head this way; shoot; and you're bound to kill something.
So, this is the promise of high modernism: within a single space, actually, any kind of activity can happen.
But as we're seeing, operational costs are starting to dwarf capital costs in terms of design parameters.
And so, with this sort of idea, what happens is, whatever actually is in the building on opening day, or whatever seems to be the most immediate need, starts to dwarf the possibility and sort of subsume it, of anything else could ever happen.
And so we're proposing a different kind of flexibility, something that we call "compartmentalized flexibility."
And the idea is that you, within that continuum, identify a series of points, and you design specifically to them.
They can be pushed off-center a little bit, but in the end you actually still get as much of that original spectrum as you originally had hoped.
With high modernist flexibility, that doesn't really work.
Now I'm going to talk about -- I'm going to build up the Seattle Central Library in this way before your eyes in about five or six diagrams, and I truly mean this is the design process that you'll see.
With the library staff and the library board, we settled on two core positions.
This is the first one, and this is showing, over the last 900 years, the evolution of the book, and other technologies.
This diagram was our sort of position piece about the book, and our position was, books are technology -- that's something people forget -- but it's a form of technology that will have to share its dominance with any other form of truly potent technology or media.
The second premise -- and this was something that was very difficult for us to convince the librarians of at first -- is that libraries, since the inception of Carnegie Library tradition in America, had a second responsibility, and that was for social roles.
Ok, now, this I'll come back to later, but something -- actually, the librarians at first said, "No, this isn't our mandate.
Our mandate is media, and particularly the book."
So what you're seeing now is actually the design of the building.
The upper diagram is what we had seen in a whole host of contemporary libraries that used high modernist flexibility.
Sort of, any activity could happen anywhere.
We don't know the future of the library; we don't know the future of the book; and so, we'll use this approach.
And what we saw were buildings that were very generic, and worse -- not only were they very generic -- so, not only does the reading room look like the copy room look like the magazine area -- but it meant that whatever issue was troubling the library at that moment was starting to engulf every other activity that was happening in it.
And in this case, what was getting engulfed were these social responsibilities by the expansion of the book.
And so we proposed what's at the lower diagram.
Very dumb approach: simply compartmentalize.
Put those things whose evolution we could predict -- and I don't mean that we could say what would actually happen in the future, but we have some certainty of the spectrum of what would happen in the future -- put those in boxes designed specifically for it, and put the things that we can't predict on the rooftops.
So that was the core idea.
Now, we had to convince the library that social roles were equally important to media, in order to get them to accept this.
What you're seeing here is actually their program on the left.
That's as it was given to us in all of its clarity and glory.
Our first operation was to re-digest it back to them, show it to them and say, "You know what? We haven't touched it, but only one-third of your own program is dedicated to media and books.
Two-thirds of it is already dedicated -- that's the white band below, the thing you said isn't important -- is already dedicated to social functions."
So once we had presented that back to them, they agreed that this sort of core concept could work.
We got the right to go back to first principles -- that's the third diagram.
We recombined everything.
And then we started making new decisions.
What you're seeing on the right is the design of the library, specifically in terms of square footage.
On the left of that diagram, here, you'll see a series of five platforms -- sort of combs, collective programs.
And on the right are the more indeterminate spaces; things like reading rooms, whose evolution in 20, 30, 40 years we can't predict.
So that literally was the design of the building.
They signed it, and to their chagrin, we came back a week later, and we presented them this.
And as you can see, it is literally the diagram on the right.
(Laughter) We just sized -- no, really, I mean that, literally.
The things on the left-hand side of the diagram, those are the boxes.
We sized them into five compartments. They're super-efficient.
We had a very low budget to work with.
We pushed them around on the site to make very literal contextual relationships.
The reading room should be able to see the water.
The main entrance should have a public plaza in front of it to abide by the zoning code, and so forth.
So, you see the five platforms, those are the boxes.
within each one, a very discrete thing is happening.
The area in between is sort of an urban continuum, these things that we can't predict their evolution to the same degree.
To give you some sense of the power of this idea, the biggest block is what we call the book spiral.
It's literally built in a very inexpensive way -- it is a parking garage for books.
It just so happens to be on the 6th through 10th floors of the building, but that is not necessarily an expensive approach.
And it allows us to organize the entire Dewey Decimal System on one continuous run; no matter how it grows or contracts within the building, it will always have its clarity to end the sort of trail of tears that we've all experienced in public libraries.
(Laughter) And so this was the final operation, which was to take these blocks as they were all pushed off kilter, and to hold onto them with a skin.
That skin serves double duty, again, for economics.
One, it is the lateral stability for the entire building; it's a structural element.
But its dimensions were designed not only for structure, but also for holding on every piece of glass.
The glass was then -- I'll use the word impregnated -- but it had a layer of metal that was called "stretched metal."
That metal acts as a microlouver, so from the exterior of the building, the sun sees it as totally opaque, but from the interior, it's entirely transparent.
So now I'm going to take you on a tour of the building.
Let me see if I can find it.
For anyone who gets motion sickness, I apologize.
So, this is the building.
And I think what's important is, when we first unveiled the building, the public saw it as being totally about our whim and ego.
And it was defended, believe it or not, by the librarians.
They said, "Look, we don't know what it is, but we know it's everything that we need it to be, based on the observations that we've done about the program."
This is going into one of the entries.
So, it's an unusual building for a public library, obviously.
So now we're going into what we call the living room.
This is actually a program that we invented with the library.
It was recognizing that public libraries are the last vestige of public free space.
There are plenty of shopping malls that allow you to get out of the rain in downtown Seattle, but there are not so many free places that allow you to get out of the rain.
So this was an unprogrammed area where people could pretty much do anything, including eat, yell, play chess and so forth.
Now we're moving up into what we call the mixing chamber.
That was the main technology area in the building.
You'll have to tell me if I'm going too fast for you.
And now up.
This is actually the place that we put into the building so I could propose to my wife, right there.
(Laughter) She said yes.
(Laughter) I'm running out of time, so I'm actually going to stop.
I can show this to you later.
But let's see if I can very quickly get into the book spiral, because I think it's, as I said, the most -- this is the main reading room -- the most unique part of the building.
You dizzy yet?
Ok, so here, this is the book spiral.
So, it's very indiscernible, but it's actually a continuous stair-stepping.
It allows you to, on one city block, go up one full floor, so that it's on a continuum.
Ok, now I'm going to go back, and I'm going to hit a second project.
I'm going to go very, very quickly through this.
Now this is the Dallas Theater.
It was an unusual client for us, because they came to us and they said, "We need you to do a new building.
We've been working in a temporary space for 30 years, but because of that temporary space, we've become an infamous theater company.
Theater is really focused in New York, Chicago and Seattle, with the exception of the Dallas Theater Company."
And the very fact that they worked in a provisional space meant that for Beckett, they could blow out a wall; they could do "Cherry Orchard" and blow a hole through the floor, and so forth.
So it was a very daunting task for us to do a brand-new building that could be a pristine building, but keep this kind of experimental nature.
And the second is, they were what we call a multi-form theater, they do different kinds of performances in repertory.
So they in the morning will do something in arena, then they'll do something in proscenium and so forth.
And so they needed to be able to quickly transform between different theater organizations, and for operational budget reasons, this actually no longer happens in pretty much any multi-form theater in the United States, so we needed to figure out a way to overcome that.
So our thought was to literally put the theater on its head: to take those things that were previously defined as front-of-house and back-of-house and stack them above house and below house, and to create what we called a theater machine.
We invest the money in the operation of the building.
It's almost as though the building could be placed anywhere, wherever you place it, the area under it is charged for theatrical performances.
And it allowed us to go back to first principles, and redefine fly tower, acoustic enclosure, light enclosure and so forth.
And at the push of a button, it allows the artistic director to move between proscenium, thrust, and in fact, arena and traverse and flat floor, in a very quick transfiguration.
So in fact, using operational budget, we can -- sorry, capital cost -- we can actually achieve what was no longer achievable in operational cost.
And that means that the artistic director now has a palette that he or she can choose from, between a series of forms and a series of processions, because that enclosure around the theater that is normally trapped with front-of-house and back-of-house spaces has been liberated.
So an artistic director has the ability to have a performance that enters in a Wagnerian procession, shows the first act in thrust, the intermission in a Greek procession, second act in arena, and so forth.
So I'm going to show you what this actually means.
This is the theater up close.
Any portion around the theater actually can be opened discretely.
The light enclosure can be lifted separate to the acoustic enclosure, so you can do Beckett with Dallas as the backdrop.
Portions can be opened, so you can now actually have motorcycles drive directly into the performance, or you can even just have an open-air performance, or for intermissions.
The balconies all move to go between those configurations, but they also disappear.
The proscenium line can also disappear.
You can bring enormous objects in, so in fact, the Dallas Theater Company -- their first show will be a play about Charles Lindbergh, and they'll want to bring in a real aircraft.
And then it also provides them, in the off-season, the ability to actually rent out their space for entirely different things.
This is it from a distance.
Open up entire portions for different kinds of events.
And at night.
Again, remove the light enclosure; keep the acoustic enclosure.
This is a monster truck show.
I'm going to show now the last project.
This also is an unusual client.
They inverted the whole idea of development.
They came to us and they said -- unlike normal developers -- they said, "We want to start out by providing a contemporary art museum in Louisville.
That's our main goal."
And so instead of being a developer that sees an opportunity to make money, they saw an ability to be a catalyst in their downtown.
And the fact that they wanted to support the contemporary art museum actually built their pro forma, so they worked in reverse.
And that pro forma led us to a mixed-use building that was very large, in order to support their aspirations of the art, but it also opened up opportunities for the art itself to collaborate, interact with commercial spaces that actually artists more and more want to work within.
And it also charged us with thinking about how to have something that was both a single building and a credible sort of sub-building.
So this is Louisville's skyline, and I'm going to take you through the various constraints that led to the project.
First: the physical constraints.
We actually had to operate on three discrete sites, all of them well smaller than the size of the building.
We had to operate next to the new Muhammad Ali Center, and respect it.
We had to operate within the 100-year floodplain.
Now, this area floods three to four times a year, and there's a levee behind our site, similar to the ones that broke in New Orleans.
Had to operate behind the I-64 corridor, a street that cuts through the middle of these separate sites.
So we're starting to build a sort of nightmare of constraints in a bathtub.
Underneath the bathtub are the city's main power lines.
And there is a pedestrian corridor that they wanted to add, that would link a series of cultural buildings, and a view corridor -- because this is the historic district -- that they didn't want to obstruct with a new building.
(Laughter) And now we're going to add 1.1 million square feet.
And if we did the traditional thing, that 1.1 million square feet -- these are the different programs -- the traditional thing would be to identify the public elements, place them on sites, and now we'd have a really terrible situation: a public thing in the middle of a bathtub that floods.
And then we would size all the other elements -- the different commercial elements: hotel, luxury housing, offices and so forth -- and dump it on top.
And we would create something that was unviable.
In fact -- and you know this -- this is called the Time Warner Building.
(Laughter) So our strategy was very simple.
Just lift the entire block, flip some of the elements over, reposition them so they have appropriate views and relationships to downtown, and make circulation connections and reroute the road.
So that's the basic concept, and now I'm going to show you what it leads to.
Ok, it seems a very formal, willful gesture, but something derived entirely out of the constraints.
And again, when we unveiled it, there was a sort of nervousness that this was about an architect making a statement, not an architect who was attempting to solve a series of problems.
Now, within that center zone, as I said, we have the ability to mix a series of things.
So here, this is sort of an x-ray -- the towers are totally developer-driven.
They told us the dimensions, the sizes and so forth, and we focused on taking all the public components -- the lobbies, the bars -- everything that different commercial elements would have, and combined it in the center, in the sort of subway map, in the transfer zone that would also include the contemporary art museum.
So it creates a situation like this, where you have artists who can operate within an art space that also has an amazing view on the 22nd floor, but it also has proximity that the curator can either open or close.
It allows people on exercise bicycles to be seen, or to see the art, and so forth.
It also means that if an artist wants to invade something like a swimming pool, they can begin to do their exhibition in a swimming pool, so they're not forced to always work within the confines of a contemporary gallery space.
So, how to build this.
It's very simple: it's a chair.
So, we begin by building the cores.
As we're building the cores, we build the contemporary art museum at grade.
That allows us to have incredible efficiency and cost efficiency.
This is not a high-budget building.
The moment the cores get to mid level, we finish the art museum; we put all the mechanical equipment in it; and then we jack it up into the air.
This is how they build really large aircraft hangars, for instance, the ones that they did for the A380.
Finish the cores, finish the meat and you get something that looks like this.
Now I only have about 30 seconds, so I want to start an animation, and we'll conclude with that.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris asked me to add -- the theater is under construction, and this project will start construction in about a year, and finish in 2010.
[identify public elements] [insert public elements at grade] [optimize tower dimensions] [place towers on site] [lift program] [flip!] [optimize program adjacencies] [connect to context] [redirect 7th street]
Some 17 years ago, I became allergic to Delhi's air.
My doctors told me that my lung capacity had gone down to 70 percent, and it was killing me.
With the help of IIT, TERI, and learnings from NASA, we discovered that there are three basic green plants, common green plants, with which we can grow all the fresh air we need indoors to keep us healthy.
We've also found that you can reduce the fresh air requirements into the building, while maintaining industry indoor air-quality standards.
The three plants are Areca palm, Mother-in-Law's Tongue and money plant.
The botanical names are in front of you.
Areca palm is a plant which removes CO2 and converts it into oxygen.
We need four shoulder-high plants per person, and in terms of plant care, we need to wipe the leaves every day in Delhi, and perhaps once a week in cleaner-air cities.
We had to grow them in vermi manure, which is sterile, or hydroponics, and take them outdoors every three to four months.
The second plant is Mother-in-law's Tongue, which is again a very common plant, and we call it a bedroom plant, because it converts CO2 into oxygen at night.
And we need six to eight waist-high plants per person.
The third plant is money plant, and this is again a very common plant; preferably grows in hydroponics.
And this particular plant removes formaldehydes and other volatile chemicals.
With these three plants, you can grow all the fresh air you need.
In fact, you could be in a bottle with a cap on top, and you would not die at all, and you would not need any fresh air.
We have tried these plants at our own building in Delhi, which is a 50,000-square-feet, 20-year-old building.
And it has close to 1,200 such plants for 300 occupants.
Our studies have found that there is a 42 percent probability of one's blood oxygen going up by one percent if one stays indoors in this building for 10 hours.
The government of India has discovered or published a study to show that this is the healthiest building in New Delhi.
And the study showed that, compared to other buildings, there is a reduced incidence of eye irritation by 52 percent, respiratory systems by 34 percent, headaches by 24 percent, lung impairment by 12 percent and asthma by nine percent.
And this study has been published on September 8, 2008, and it's available on the government of India website.
Our experience points to an amazing increase in human productivity by over 20 percent by using these plants.
And also a reduction in energy requirements in buildings by an outstanding 15 percent, because you need less fresh air.
We are now replicating this in a 1.75-million-square-feet building, which will have 60,000 indoor plants.
Why is this important?
It is also important for the environment, because the world's energy requirements are expected to grow by 30 percent in the next decade.
40 percent of the world's energy is taken up by buildings currently, and 60 percent of the world's population will be living in buildings in cities with a population of over one million in the next 15 years.
And there is a growing preference for living and working in air-conditioned places.
"Be the change you want to see in the world," said Mahatma Gandhi.
And thank you for listening.
(Applause)
Imagine a future where nobody dies instead, our minds are uploaded to a digital world.
They might live on in a realistic, simulated environment with avatar bodies, and could still call in and contribute to the biological world.
Mind uploading has powerful appeal but what would it actually take to scan a persons brain and upload their mind?
The main challenges are scanning a brain in enough detail to capture the mind and perfectly recreating that detail artificially.
But first, we have to know what to scan.
The human brain contains about 86 billion neurons, connected by at least a hundred trillion synapses.
The pattern of connectivity among the brains neurons, that is, all of the neurons and all their connections to each other, is called the connectome.
We havent yet mapped the connectome, and theres also a lot more to neural signaling.
There are hundreds, possibly thousands of different kinds of connections, or synapses.
Each functions in a slightly different way.
Some work faster, some slower.
Some grow or shrink rapidly in the process of learning; some are more stable over time.
And beyond the trillions of precise, 1-to-1 connections between neurons, some neurons also spray out neurotransmitters that affect many other neurons at once.
All of these different kinds of interactions would need to be mapped in order to copy a persons mind.
There are also a lot of influences on neural signaling that are poorly understood or undiscovered.
To name just one example, patterns of activity between neurons are likely influenced by a type of cell called glia.
Glia surround neurons and, according to some scientists, may even outnumber them by as many as ten to one.
Glia were once thought to be purely for structural support, and their functions are still poorly understood, but at least some of them can generate their own signals that influence information processing.
Our understanding of the brain isnt good enough to determine what wed need to scan in order to replicate the mind, but assuming our knowledge does advance to that point, how would we scan it?
Currently, we can accurately scan a living human brain with resolutions of about half a millimeter using our best non-invasive scanning method, MRI.
To detect a synapse, well need to scan at a resolution of about a micron a thousandth of a millimeter.
To distinguish the kind of synapse and precisely how strong each synapse is, well need even better resolution.
MRI depends on powerful magnetic fields.
Scanning at the resolution required to determine the details of individual synapses would requires a field strength high enough to cook a persons tissues.
So this kind of leap in resolution would require fundamentally new scanning technology.
It would be more feasible to scan a dead brain using an electron microscope, but even that technology is nowhere near good enough and requires killing the subject first.
Assuming we eventually understand the brain well enough to know what to scan and develop the technology to safely scan at that resolution, the next challenge would be to recreate that information digitally.
The main obstacles to doing so are computing power and storage space, both of which are improving every year.
Were actually much closer to attaining this technological capacity than we are to understanding or scanning our own minds.
Artificial neural networks already run our internet search engines, digital assistants, self-driving cars, Wall Street trading algorithms, and smart phones.
Nobody has yet built an artificial network with 86 billion neurons, but as computing technology improves, it may be possible to keep track of such massive data sets.
At every step in the scanning and uploading process, wed have to be certain we were capturing all the necessary information accurately or theres no telling what ruined version of a mind might emerge.
While mind uploading is theoretically possible, were likely hundreds of years away from the technology and scientific understanding that would make it a reality.
And that reality would come with ethical and philosophical considerations: who would have access to mind uploading?
What rights would be accorded to uploaded minds?
How could this technology be abused?
Even if we can eventually upload our minds, whether we should remains an open question.
On December 7, 1941, 16 year-old Aki Kurose shared in the horror of millions of Americans when Japanese planes attacked Pearl Harbor.
What she did not know, was how that shared experience would soon leave her family and over 120,000 Japanese Americans alienated from their country, both socially and physically.
As of 1941, Japanese American communities had been growing in the US for over 50 years.
About one-third of them were immigrants, many of whom settled on the West Coast and had lived there for decades.
The rest were born as American citizens, like Aki.
Born Akiko Kato in Seattle, Aki grew up in a diverse neighborhood where she never thought of herself as anything but American until the day after the attack, when a teacher told her: You people bombed Pearl Harbor."
Amid racism, paranoia, and fears of sabotage, people labelled Japanese Americans as potential traitors.
FBI agents began to search homes, confiscate belongings and detain community leaders without trial.
Akis family was not immediately subjected to these extreme measures, but on February 19, 1942, President Roosevelt issued Executive Order 9066.
The order authorized the removal of any suspected enemies including anyone of even partial Japanese heritage from designated military areas. At first, Japanese Americans were pushed to leave restricted areas and migrate inland.
But as the government froze their bank accounts and imposed local restrictions such as curfews, many were unable to leave Akis family among them.
In March, a proclamation forbid Japanese Americans from changing their residency, trapping them in military zones.
In May, the army moved Aki and her family, along with over 7,000 Japanese Americans living in Seattle to "Camp Harmony" in Puyallup, Washington.
This was one of several makeshift detention centers at former fairgrounds and racetracks, where entire families were packed into poorly converted stables and barracks.
Over the ensuing months, the army moved Japanese Americans into long-term camps in desolate areas of the West and South, moving Aki and her family to Minidoka in southern Idaho.
Guarded by armed soldiers, many of these camps were still being constructed when incarcerees moved in.
These hastily built prisons were overcrowded and unsanitary.
People frequently fell ill and were unable to receive proper medical care.
The War Relocation Authority relied on incarcerees to keep the camps running.
Many worked in camp facilities or taught in poorly equipped classrooms, while others raised crops and animals.
Some Japanese Americans rebelled, organizing labor strikes and even rioting.
But many more, like Akis parents, endured.
They constantly sought to recreate some semblance of life outside the camps, but the reality of their situation was unavoidable.
Like many younger incarcerees, Aki was determined to leave her camp.
She finished her final year of high school at Minidoka, and with the aid of an anti-racist Quaker organization, she was able to enroll at Friends University in Kansas.
For Akis family however, things wouldnt begin to change until late 1944.
A landmark Supreme Court case ruled that continued detention of American citizens without charges was unconstitutional.
In the fall of 1945, the war ended and the camps closed down.
Remaining incarcerees were given a mere $25 and a train ticket to their pre-war address, but many no longer had a home or job to return to.
Akis family had been able to keep their apartment, and Aki eventually returned to Seattle after college.
However, post-war prejudice made finding work difficult.
Incarcarees faced discrimination and resentment from workers and tenants who replaced them.
Fortunately, Japanese Americans werent alone in the fight against racial discrimination.
Aki found work with one of Seattles first interracial labor unions and joined the Congress of Racial Equality.
She became a teacher, and over the next several decades, her advocacy for multicultural, socially conscious education would impact thousands of students.
However, many ex-incarcerees, particularly members of older generations, were unable to rebuild their lives after the war.
Children of incarcerees began a movement calling for the United States to atone for this historic injustice.
In 1988, the US government officially apologized for the wartime incarceration admitting it was the catastrophic result of racism, hysteria, and failed political leadership.
Three years after this apology, Aki Kurose was awarded the Human Rights Award from the Seattle Chapter of the United Nations, celebrating her vision of peace and respect for people of all backgrounds.
100 years ago, there were 2,000 varieties of peaches, nearly 2,000 different varieties of plums and almost 800 named varieties of apples growing in the United States.
Today, only a fraction of those remain, and what is left is threatened by industrialization of agriculture, disease and climate change.
Those varieties that are threatened include the Blood Cling, a red-flesh peach brought by Spanish missionaries to the Americas, then cultivated by Native Americans for centuries; an apricot that was brought by Chinese immigrants who came to work on the Transcontinental Railroad; and countless varieties of plums that originated in the Middle East and were then brought by Italian, French and German immigrants.
None of these varieties are indigenous.
In fact, almost all of our fruit trees were brought here, including apples and peaches and cherries.
So more than just food, embedded within these fruit is our culture.
It's the people who cared for and cultivated them, who valued them so much that they brought them here with them as a connection to their home, and it's the way that they've passed them on and shared them.
In many ways, these fruit are our story.
And I was fortunate enough to learn about it through an artwork that I created entitled the "Tree of 40 Fruit."
The Tree of 40 Fruit is a single tree that grows 40 different varieties of stone fruit.
So that's peaches, plums, apricots, nectarines and cherries all growing on one tree.
It's designed to be a normal-looking tree throughout the majority of the year, until spring, when it blossoms in pink and white and then in summer, bears a multitude of different fruit.
I began the project for purely artistic reasons: I wanted to change the reality of the everyday, and to be honest, create this startling moment when people would see this tree blossom in all these different colors and bear all of these different fruit.
I created the Tree of 40 Fruit through the process of grafting.
I'll collect cuttings in winter, store them, and then graft them onto the ends of branches in spring.
In fact, almost all fruit trees are grafted, because the seed of a fruit tree is a genetic variant of the parent.
So when we find a variety that we really like, the way that we propagate it is by taking a cutting off of one tree and putting it onto another -- which is kind of crazy to think that every single Macintosh apple came from one tree that's been grafted over and over from generation to generation.
But it also means that fruit trees can't be preserved by seed.
I've known about grafting as long as I can remember.
My great-grandfather made a living grafting peach orchards in Southeastern Pennsylvania.
And although I never met him, any time anyone would mention his name, they were quick to note that he knew how to graft as if he had a magical or mystical capability.
I decided on the number 40 for the Tree of 40 Fruit because it's found throughout Western religion as not the quantifiable dozen and not the infinite but a number that's beyond counting.
It's a bounty or a multitude.
But the problem was that when I started, I couldn't find 40 different varieties of these fruit, and this is despite the fact that I live in New York state, which, a century ago, was one of the leading producers of these fruit.
So as they were tearing out research orchards and old, vintage orchards, I would collect branches off them and graft them onto trees in my nursery.
So this is what the Tree of 40 Fruit look like when they were first planted, and this is what they look like six years later.
This is definitely not a sport of immediate gratification -- (Laughter) It takes a year to know if a graft has succeeded; it takes two to three years to know if it produces fruit; and it takes up to eight years to create just one of the trees.
Each of the varieties grafted to the Tree of 40 Fruit has a slightly different form and a slightly different color.
And I realized that by creating a timeline of when all these blossomed in relationship to each other, I can essentially shape or design how the tree appears during spring.
And this is how they appear during summer.
They produce fruit from June through September.
First is cherries, then apricots, Asian plums, nectarines and peaches, and I think I forgot one in there, somewhere ...
(Laughter) Although it's an artwork that exists outside of the gallery, as the project continues, it's been conservation by way of the art world.
As I've been asked to create these in different locations, what I'll do is I'll research varieties that originated or were historically grown in that area, I'll source them locally and graft them to the tree so that it becomes an agricultural history of the area where they're located.
And then the project got picked up online, which was horrifying and humbling.
The horrifying part was all of the tattoos that I saw of images of the Tree of 40 Fruit.
(Laughter) Which I was like, "Why would you do that to your body?"
(Laughter) And the humbling part was all of the requests that I received from pastors, from rabbis and priests who asked to use the tree as a central part within their service.
And then it became a meme -- and the answer to that question is "I hope not?"
[Is your marriage like the Tree of 40 Fruit?] (Laughter) Like all good memes, this has led to an interview on NPR's "Weekend Edition," and as a college professor, I thought I peaked -- like, that was the pinnacle of my career -- but you never know who's listening to NPR.
And several weeks after the NPR interview, I received an email from the Department of Defense.
The Defense Advanced Research Project Administration invited me to come talk about innovation and creativity, and it's a conversation that quickly shifted to a discussion of food security.
You see, our national security is dependent upon our food security.
Now that we've created these monocultures that only grow a few varieties of each crop, if something happens to just one of those varieties, it can have a dramatic impact upon our food supply.
And the key to maintaining our food security is preserving our biodiversity.
100 years ago, this was done by everybody that had a garden or a small stand of trees in their backyard, and grew varieties that were passed down through their family.
These are plums from just one Tree of 40 Fruit in one week in August.
Several years into the project, I was told that I have one of the largest collections of these fruit in the Eastern United States, which, as an artist, is absolutely terrifying.
(Laughter) But in many ways, I didn't know what I had.
I discovered that the majority of the varieties I had were heirloom varieties, so those that were grown before 1945, which is seen as the dawn of the industrialization of agriculture.
Several of the varieties dated back thousands and thousands of years.
And finding out how rare they were, I became obsessed with trying to preserve them, and the vehicle for this became art.
I would go into old, vintage orchards before they were torn out and I would save the bowl or the trunk section that possessed the original graft union.
I started doing pressings of flowers and the leaves to create herbarium specimens.
I started to sequence the DNA.
But ultimately, I set out to preserve the story through these copper-plate etchings and letterpress descriptions.
To tell the story of the George IV peach, which took root between two buildings in New York City -- someone walks by, tastes it, it becomes a major commercial variety in the 19th century because it tastes just that good.
Then all but vanishes, because it doesn't ship well and it doesn't conform to modern agriculture.
But I realize that as a story, it needs to be told.
And in the telling of that story, it has to include the experience of being able to touch, to smell and to taste those varieties.
So I set out to create an orchard to make these fruit available to the public, and have the aim of placing them in the highest density of people that I could possibly find.
Naturally, I started looking for an acre of land in New York City -- (Laughter) which, in retrospect, seemed, like, rather ambitious, and probably the reason why nobody was returning my phone calls or emails -- (Laughter) until eventually, four years later, I heard back from Governors Island.
So Governors Island is a former naval base that was given to the City of New York in 2000.
And it opened up all of this land just a five-minute ferry ride from New York.
And they invited me to create a project that we're calling the "Open Orchard" that will bring back fruit varieties that haven't been grown in New York for over a century.
Currently in progress, The Open Orchard will be 50 multigrafted trees that possess 200 heirloom and antique fruit varieties.
So these are varieties that originated or were historically grown in the region.
Varieties like the Early Strawberry apple, which originated on 13th Street and Third Avenue.
Since a fruit tree can't be preserved by seed, The Open Orchard will act like a living gene bank, or an archive of these fruit.
Like the Tree of 40 Fruit, it will be experiential; it will also be symbolic.
Most importantly, it's going to invite people to participate in conservation and to learn more about their food.
Through the Tree of 40 Fruit, I've received thousands and thousands of emails from people, asking basic questions about "How do you plant a tree?"
With less than three percent of the population having any direct tie to agriculture, the Open Orchard is going to invite people to come take part in public programming and to take part in workshops, to learn how to graft, to grow, to prune and to harvest a tree; to take part in fresh eating and blossom tours; to work with local chefs to learn how to use these fruit and to recreate centuries-old dishes that many of these varieties were grown specifically for.
Extending beyond the physical site of the orchard, it will be a cookbook that compiles all of those recipes.
It will be a field guide that talks about the characteristics and traits of those fruit, their origin and their story.
Growing up on a farm, I thought I understood agriculture, and I didn't want anything to do with it.
So I became an artist -- (Laughter) But I have to admit that it's something within my own DNA.
And I don't think that I'm the only one.
100 years ago, we were all much more closely tied to the culture, the cultivation and the story of our food, and we've been separated from that.
The Open Orchard creates the opportunity not just to reconnect to this unknown past, but a way for us to consider what the future of our food could be.
Thank you.
(Applause)
If you're at all like me, this is what you do with the sunny summer weekends in San Francisco: you build experimental kite-powered hydrofoils capable of more than 30 knots.
And you realize that there is incredible power in the wind, and it can do amazing things.
And one day, a vessel not unlike this will probably break the world speed record.
But kites aren't just toys like this.
Kites: I'm going to give you a brief history, and tell you about the magnificent future of every child's favorite plaything.
So, kites are more than a thousand years old, and the Chinese used them for military applications, and even for lifting men.
So they knew at that stage they could carry large weights.
I'm not sure why there is a hole in this particular man.
(Laughter) In 1827, a fellow called George Pocock actually pioneered the use of kites for towing buggies in races against horse carriages across the English countryside.
Then of course, at the dawn of aviation, all of the great inventors of the time -- like Hargreaves, like Langley, even Alexander Graham Bell, inventor of the telephone, who was flying this kite -- were doing so in the pursuit of aviation.
Then these two fellows came along, and they were flying kites to develop the control systems that would ultimately enable powered human flight.
So this is of course Orville and Wilbur Wright, and the Wright Flyer.
And their experiments with kites led to this momentous occasion, where we powered up and took off for the first-ever 12-second human flight.
And that was fantastic for the future of commercial aviation.
But unfortunately, it relegated kites once again to be considered children's toys.
That was until the 1970s, where we had the last energy crisis.
And a fabulous man called Miles Loyd who lives on the outskirts of San Francisco, wrote this seminal paper that was completely ignored in the Journal of Energy about how to use basically an airplane on a piece of string to generate enormous amounts of electricity.
The real key observation he made is that a free-flying wing can sweep through more sky and generate more power in a unit of time than a fixed-wing turbine.
So turbines grew. And they can now span up to three hundred feet at the hub height, but they can't really go a lot higher, and more height is where the more wind is, and more power -- as much as twice as much.
So cut to now. We still have an energy crisis, and now we have a climate crisis as well. You know, so humans generate about 12 trillion watts, or 12 terawatts, from fossil fuels.
And Al Gore has spoken to why we need to hit one of these targets, and in reality what that means is in the next 30 to 40 years, we have to make 10 trillion watts or more of new clean energy somehow.
Wind is the second-largest renewable resource after solar: 3600 terawatts, more than enough to supply humanity 200 times over.
The majority of it is in the higher altitudes, above 300 feet, where we don't have a technology as yet to get there.
So this is the dawn of the new age of kites.
This is our test site on Maui, flying across the sky.
I'm now going to show you the first autonomous generation of power by every child's favorite plaything.
As you can tell, you need to be a robot to fly this thing for thousands of hours.
It makes you a little nauseous.
And here we're actually generating about 10 kilowatts -- so, enough to power probably five United States households -- with a kite not much larger than this piano.
And the real significant thing here is we're developing the control systems, as did the Wright brothers, that would enable sustained, long-duration flight.
And it doesn't hurt to do it in a location like this either.
So this is the equivalent for a kite flier of peeing in the snow -- that's tracing your name in the sky.
And this is where we're actually going.
So we're beyond the 12-second steps.
And we're working towards megawatt-scale machines that fly at 2000 feet and generate tons of clean electricity.
So you ask, how big are those machines?
Well, this paper plane would be maybe a -- oop!
That would be enough to power your cell phone.
Your Cessna would be 230 killowatts.
If you'd loan me your Gulfstream, I'll rip its wings off and generate you a megawatt.
If you give me a 747, I'll make six megawatts, which is more than the largest wind turbines today.
And the Spruce Goose would be a 15-megawatt wing.
So that is audacious, you say. I agree.
But audacious is what has happened many times before in history.
This is a refrigerator factory, churning out airplanes for World War II.
Prior to World War II, they were making 1000 planes a year.
By 1945, they were making 100,000.
With this factory and 100,000 planes a year, we could make all of America's electricity in about 10 years.
So really this is a story about the audacious plans of young people with these dreams. There are many of us.
I am lucky enough to work with 30 of them.
And I think we need to support all of the dreams of the kids out there doing these crazy things.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We live in a vast universe, on a small wet planet, where billions of years ago single-celled life forms evolved from the same elements as all non-living material around them, proliferating and radiating into an incredible ray of complex life forms.
All of this living and inanimate, microscopic and cosmic is governed by mathematical laws with apparently arbitrary constants.
And this opens up a question: If the universe is completely governed by these laws, couldnt a powerful enough computer simulate it exactly?
Could our reality actually be an incredibly detailed simulation set in place by a much more advanced civilization?
This idea may sound like science fiction, but it has been the subject of serious inquiry.
Philosopher Nick Bostrom advanced a compelling argument that were likely living in a simulation, and some scientists also think its a possibility.
These scientists have started thinking about experimental tests to find out whether our universe is a simulation.
They are hypothesizing about what the constraints of the simulation might be, and how those constraints could lead to detectable signs in the world.
So where might we look for those glitches?
One idea is that as a simulation runs, it might accumulate errors over time.
To correct for these errors the simulators could adjust the constants in the laws of nature.
These shifts could be tiny for instance, certain constants weve measured with accuracies of parts per million have stayed steady for decades, so any drift would have to be on an even smaller scale.
But as we gain more precision in our measurements of these constants, we might detect slight changes over time.
Another possible place to look comes from the concept that finite computing power, no matter how huge, cant simulate infinities.
If space and time are continuous, then even a tiny piece of the universe has infinite points and becomes impossible to simulate with finite computing power.
So a simulation would have to represent space and time in very small pieces.
These would be almost incomprehensibly tiny.
But we might be able to search for them by using certain subatomic particles as probes.
The basic principle is this: the smaller something is, the more sensitive it will be to disruption think of hitting a pothole on a skateboard versus in a truck.
Any unit in space-time would be so small that most things would travel through it without disruption not just objects large enough to be visible to the naked eye, but also molecules, atoms, and even electrons and most of the other subatomic particles weve discovered.
If we do discover a tiny unit in space-time or a shifting constant in a natural law, would that prove the universe is a simulation?
No it would only be the first of many steps.
There could be other explanations for each of those findings.
And a lot more evidence would be needed to establish the simulation hypothesis as a working theory of nature.
However many tests we design, were limited by some assumptions they all share.
Our current understanding of the natural world on the quantum level breaks down at whats known as the planck scale.
If the unit of space-time is on this scale, we wouldnt be able to look for it with our current scientific understanding.
Theres still a wide range of things that are smaller than whats currently observable but larger than the planck scale to investigate.
Similarly, shifts in the constants of natural laws could occur so slowly that they would only be observable over the lifetime of the universe.
So they could exist even if we dont detect them over centuries or millennia of measurements.
We're also biased towards thinking that our universes simulator, if it exists, makes calculations the same way we do, with similar computational limitations.
Really, we have no way of knowing what an alien civilizations constraints and methods would be but we have to start somewhere.
It may never be possible to prove conclusively that the universe either is, or isnt, a simulation, but well always be pushing science and technology forward in pursuit of the question: what is the nature of reality?
After a savage seafaring skirmish and eight long days of being battered by waves, Vinminen a powerful bard and sage as old as the world itself washed up on the shores of distant Pohjola.
Unlike his home Kalevala, Pohjola was a dark and frozen land, ruled by Louhi, the gap-tooth hag of the North."
The cunning witch nursed Vinminen back to health but demanded a reward for returning him home.
Not content with mere gold or silver, Louhi wanted what did not yet exist the Sampo.
To be forged from the tips of white-swan feathers," the milk of greatest virtue," a single grain of barley," and the finest wool of lambskins," this artifact was said to be an endless font of wealth.
But Vinminen knew that only Seppo Ilmarinen, the Eternal Hammerer who forged the sky-dome itself, could craft such an object.
So he convinced Louhi to send him home and fetch the smith.
Though the journey was far from easy, the bard finally made it back to Kalevala.
But Ilmarinen refused to go to the gloomy North a land of witches and man-eaters.
But keeping true to his word, Vinminen tricked Ilmarinen into climbing a giant tree, before summoning a mighty storm to carry the smith all the way to Pohjola.
Ilmarinen was well received in the North.
Louhi lavished her guest with extravagant hospitality and promised him the hand of her beautiful daughter if he could craft what she wished.
When she finally asked if Ilmarinen was capable of forging the Sampo, the powerful smith declared he could indeed accomplish the task.
But try as he might to bend the forge to his will, its fires only produced other artifacts beautiful in appearance but ill-mannered in nature.
An elegant crossbow that thirsted for blood and a gleaming plow that ruined cultivated fields among others.
Finally, Ilmarinen summoned the winds themselves to work the bellows, and in three days time he pulled the Sampo, with its lid of many colors from the forges flames.
On its sides the smith carefully crafted a grain mill, a salt mill, and a money mill.
Louhi was so delighted with the objects limitless productive power that she ran off to lock her treasure inside a mountain.
But when Ilmarinen tried to claim his prize, the promised maiden refused to marry him, and the smith had to return home alone.
Years passed, and while Pohjola prospered, Ilmarinen and Vinminen were without wives or great wealth.
Bitter about this injustice, the bard proposed a quest to retrieve the Sampo, and the two sailed north with the help of Lemminkinen a beautiful young man with a history of starting trouble.
Upon arrival, Vinminen requested half the Sampos profits as compensation or theyd take the artifact by force.
Outraged at this request, Louhi summoned her forces to fight the heroes.
But as her army readied for war, the bard played his magic harp, Kantele, entrancing all who heard it and sending Pohjola into a deep slumber.
Unimpeded, the three men took the Sampo and quietly made their escape.
Lemminkinen was ecstatic at their success, and demanded that Vinminen sing of their triumph.
The bard refused, knowing the dangers of celebrating too early.
But after three days of traveling, Lemminkinens excitement overwhelmed him, and he recklessly broke out in song.
His awful singing voice woke a nearby crane, whose screeching cries roused the Pohjolan horde.
The army made chase.
As their warship closed in, Vinminen raised a rock to breach their hull.
Undeterred, Louhi transformed into a giant eagle, carrying her army on her back as they attacked the heroes vessel.
She managed to grab the Sampo in her claw, but just as quickly, it dropped into the sea, shattering into pieces and sinking deep beyond her talons reach.
Buried on the ocean floor, the remnants of this powerful device remain in the realm of Ahti, god of water where they grind salt for the seas to this very day.
(Imitates fishing cat) That's my impersonation of a fishing cat, which actually sounds more like this.
(Prerecorded fishing cat sounds) It's a cat that loves water, loves to fish, and lives in some of the most unique and valuable ecosystems on earth: the wetlands and mangrove forests of South and Southeast Asia.
Aren't they fishing awesome?
(Laughter) Fishing cats are one of about 40 species of wildcats.
Like tigers and lions, only much smaller.
They're probably around twice the size of our average domestic cat.
In Indonesia, people call them "kucing bakau," which literally translates to "the cat of the mangroves."
But I like to call them the tigers of the mangroves.
Now, we don't know fishing cats as well as we do tigers, but what we've learned is that these cats can be a flagship species to a globally important ecosystem, and a visual bait attached to a strong line for conservation.
Are you hooked yet?
(Laughter) Like many endangered species, fishing cats are threatened by habitat loss, mainly because of our international demand for farmed fish and shrimp, and the deforestation of nearly half the historic mangrove cover in South and Southeast Asia.
Mangroves, on the other hand, are much more than just habitat to the fishing cat.
They are home to a fantastic array of species, like jackals, turtles, shorebirds and otters.
(Laughter) Mangroves also prevent soil erosion, and they can be the first line of defense between storm surges, tsunamis and the millions of people who live next to these forests for their day-to-day survival.
The fact that puts the icing on the cake -- or the earth, I should say -- is that mangroves can store upwards of five to ten times more carbon dioxide than tropical forests.
So protecting one acre of mangroves may well be like protecting five or more acres of tropical forests.
Would you like to eliminate you entire life's carbon footprint?
Well, mangroves can offer you one of the best bangs for your conservation buck.
Deforestation, extinction and climate change are all global problems that we can solve by giving value to our species and ecosystems and by working together with the local people who live next to them.
This is one of three river deltas in coastal South India where communities came together to change the face and potentially, the fate of this planet.
In less than a decade, with international support, the state forest departments and the local communities worked together to restore over 20,000 acres of unproductive fish and shrimp farms back into mangroves.
About five years ago, guess who we discovered in these restored mangroves?
When we shared images of these fishing cats with local people, we were able to build pride among them about a globally revered endangered species and ecosystem in their backyards.
We were also able to build trust with some people to help them lead alternative livelihoods.
Meet Santosh, a 19-year-old boy who not only became a conservation professional after working with us for just over a year but also went on to involve many local fishermen in helping study and protect fishing cats.
Meet Moshi, a tribal poacher, who not only stopped hunting and became our most prized conservationist, but also used his traditional knowledge to educate his entire community to stop hunting fishing cats, otters and the many other threatened species that live in the mangroves in his backyard.
Fish and shrimp farmers, like Venkat, are now willing to work with us conservationists to test the sustainable harvest of ecosystem services like crabs, and possibly even honey, from mangroves.
Incentives that could get them to protect and plant mangroves where they have been lost.
A win-win-win for fishing cats, local people and the global community.
These stories show us that we can all be part of a future where fishing cats and the lost mangrove forests are protected and restored by fishermen themselves, creating carbon sinks that can help offset our ecological footprints.
So while the fishing cat may be small, I hope that we've been able to help make it a big deal.
One that we can all invest in to help sustain our lives on earth a little longer.
Or as our friend here would say ...
(Prerecorded fishing cat sounds) Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm sitting in a bar with a couple of friends -- literally, a couple, married couple.
They're the parents of two young children, seven academic degrees between them, big nerds, really nice people but very sleep-deprived.
And they ask me the question I get asked more than any other question.
They go, "So, Emily, how do couples, you know, sustain a strong sexual connection over multiple decades?"
I'm a sex educator, which is why my friends ask me questions like this, and I am also a big nerd like my friends.
I love science, which is why I can give them something like an answer.
Research actually has pretty solid evidence that couples who sustain strong sexual connections over multiple decades have two things in common.
Before I can tell my friends what those two things are, I have to tell them a few things that they are not.
These are not couples who have sex very often.
Almost none of us have sex very often.
We are busy.
They are also not couples who necessarily have wild, adventurous sex.
One recent study actually found that the couples who are most strongly predicted to have strong sexual and relationship satisfaction, the best predictor of that is not what kind of sex they have or how often or where they have it but whether they cuddle after sex.
And they are not necessarily couples who constantly can't wait to keep their hands off each other.
Some of them are.
They experience what the researchers call "spontaneous desire," that just sort of seems to appear out of the blue.
Erika Moen, the cartoonist who illustrated my book, draws spontaneous desire as a lightning bolt to the genitals -- kaboom! -- you just want it out of the blue.
That is absolutely one normal, healthy way to experience sexual desire.
But there's another healthy way to experience sexual desire.
It's called "responsive desire."
Where spontaneous desire seems to emerge in anticipation of pleasure, responsive desire emerges in response to pleasure.
There's a sex therapist in New Jersey named Christine Hyde, who taught me this great metaphor she uses with her clients.
She says, imagine that your best friend invites you to a party.
You say yes because it's your best friend and a party.
But then, as the date approaches, you start thinking, "Aw, there's going to be all this traffic.
We have to find child care.
Am I really going to want to put my party clothes on and get there at the end of the week?"
But you put on your party clothes and you show up to the party, and what happens?
You have a good time at the party.
If you are having fun at the party, you are doing it right.
When it comes to a sexual connection, it's the same thing.
You put on your party clothes, you set up the child care, you put your body in the bed, you let your skin touch your partner's skin and allow your body to wake up and remember, "Oh, right! I like this.
I like this person!"
That's responsive desire, and it is key to understanding the couples who sustain a strong sexual connection over the long term, because -- and this is the part where I tell my friends the two characteristics of the couples who do sustain a strong sexual connection -- one, they have a strong friendship at the foundation of their relationship.
Specifically, they have strong trust.
Relationship researcher and therapist, developer of emotionally focused therapy, Sue Johnson, boils trust down to this question: Are you there for me?
Especially, are you emotionally present and available for me?
Friends are there for each other.
One.
The second characteristic is that they prioritize sex.
They decide that it matters for their relationship.
They choose to set aside all the other things that they could be doing -- the children they could be raising and the jobs they could be going to, the other family members to pay attention to, the other friends they might want to hang out with.
God forbid they just want to watch some television or go to sleep.
Stop doing all that stuff and create a protected space where all you're going to do is put your body in the bed and let your skin touch your partner's skin.
So that's it: best friends, prioritize sex.
So I said this to my friends in the bar.
I was like, best friends, prioritize sex, I told them about the party, I said you put your skin next to your partner's skin.
And one of the partners I was talking to goes, "Aaagh."
(Laughter) And I was like, "OK, so, there's your problem."
(Laughter) The difficulty was not that they did not want to go to the party, necessarily.
If the difficulty is just a lack of spontaneous desire for party, you know what to do: you put on your party clothes and show up for the party.
If you're having fun at the party, you're doing it right.
Their difficulty was that this was a party where she didn't love what there was available to eat, the music was not her favorite music, and she wasn't totally sure she felt great about her relationships with people who were at the party.
And this happens all the time: nice people who love each other come to dread sex.
These couples, if they seek sex therapy, the therapist might have them stand up and put as much distance between their bodies as they need in order to feel comfortable, and the less interested partner will make 20 feet of space.
And the really difficult part is that space is not empty.
It is crowded with weeks or months or more of the, "You're not listening to me," and "I don't know what's wrong with me but your criticism isn't helping," and, "If you loved me, you would," and, "You're not there for me."
Years, maybe, of all these difficult feelings.
In the book, I use this really silly metaphor of difficult feelings as sleepy hedgehogs that you are fostering until you can find a way to set them free by turning toward them with kindness and compassion.
And the couples who struggle to maintain a strong sexual connection, the distance between them is crowded with these sleepy hedgehogs.
And it happens in any relationship that lasts long enough.
You, too, are fostering a prickle of sleepy hedgehogs between you and your certain special someone.
The difference between couples who sustain a strong sexual connection and the ones who don't is not that they don't experience these difficult hurt feelings, it's that they turn towards those difficult feelings with kindness and compassion so that they can set them free and find their way back to each other.
So my friends in the bar are faced with the question under the question, not, "How do we sustain a strong connection?"
but, "How do we find our way back to it?"
And, yes, there is science to answer this question, but in 25 years as a sex educator, one thing I have learned is sometimes, Emily, less science, more hedgehogs.
So I told them about me.
I spent many months writing a book about the science of women's sexual well-being.
I was thinking about sex all day, every day, and I was so stressed by the project that I had zero -- zero! -- interest in actually having any sex.
And then I spent months traveling all over, talking with anyone who would listen about the science of women's sexual well-being.
And by the time I got home, you know, I'd show up for the party, put my body in the bed, let my skin touch my partner's skin, and I was so exhausted and overwhelmed I would just cry and fall asleep.
And the months of isolation fostered fear and loneliness and frustration.
So many hedgehogs.
My best friend, this person I love and admire, felt a million miles away.
But ...
he was still there for me.
No matter how many difficult feelings there were, he turned toward them with kindness and compassion.
He never turned away.
And what was the second characteristic of couples who sustain a strong sexual connection?
They prioritize sex.
They decide that it matters for their relationship, that they do what it takes to find their way back to the connection.
I told my friends what sex therapist and researcher Peggy Kleinplatz says.
She asks: What kind of sex is worth wanting?
My partner and I looked at the quality of our connection and what it brought to our lives, and we looked at the family of sleepy hedgehogs I had introduced into our home.
And we decided it was worth it.
We decided -- we chose -- to do what it took to find our way, turning towards each of those sleepy hedgehogs, those difficult hurt feelings, with kindness and compassion and setting them free so that we could find our way back to the connection that mattered for our relationship.
This is not the story we are usually told about how sexual desire works in long-term relationships.
But I can think of nothing more romantic, nothing sexier, than being chosen as a priority because that connection matters enough, even after I introduced all of these difficult feelings into our relationship.
How do you sustain a strong sexual connection over the long term?
You look into the eyes of your best friend, and you keep choosing to find your way back.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I've been working on issues of poverty for more than 20 years, and so it's ironic that the problem that and question that I most grapple with is how you actually define poverty. What does it mean?
So often, we look at dollar terms -- people making less than a dollar or two or three a day.
And yet the complexity of poverty really has to look at income as only one variable.
Because really, it's a condition about choice, and the lack of freedom.
And I had an experience that really deepened and elucidated for me the understanding that I have.
It was in Kenya, and I want to share it with you.
I was with my friend Susan Meiselas, the photographer, in the Mathare Valley slums.
Now, Mathare Valley is one of the oldest slums in Africa.
It's about three miles out of Nairobi, and it's a mile long and about two-tenths of a mile wide, where over half a million people live crammed in these little tin shacks, generation after generation, renting them, often eight or 10 people to a room.
And it's known for prostitution, violence, drugs: a hard place to grow up.
And when we were walking through the narrow alleys, it was literally impossible not to step in the raw sewage and the garbage alongside the little homes.
But at the same time it was also impossible not to see the human vitality, the aspiration and the ambition of the people who live there: women washing their babies, washing their clothes, hanging them out to dry.
I met this woman, Mama Rose, who has rented that little tin shack for 32 years, where she lives with her seven children.
Four sleep in one twin bed, and three sleep on the mud and linoleum floor.
And she keeps them all in school by selling water from that kiosk, and from selling soap and bread from the little store inside.
It was also the day after the inauguration, and I was reminded how Mathare is still connected to the globe.
And I would see kids on the street corners, and they'd say "Obama, he's our brother!"
And I'd say "Well, Obama's my brother, so that makes you my brother too."
And they would look quizzically, and then be like, "High five!"
And it was here that I met Jane.
I was struck immediately by the kindness and the gentleness in her face, and I asked her to tell me her story.
She started off by telling me her dream. She said, "I had two.
My first dream was to be a doctor, and the second was to marry a good man who would stay with me and my family, because my mother was a single mom, and couldn't afford to pay for school fees.
So I had to give up the first dream, and I focused on the second."
She got married when she was 18, had a baby right away.
And when she turned 20, found herself pregnant with a second child, her mom died and her husband left her -- married another woman.
So she was again in Mathare, with no income, no skill set, no money.
And so she ultimately turned to prostitution.
It wasn't organized in the way we often think of it.
She would go into the city at night with about 20 girls, look for work, and sometimes come back with a few shillings, or sometimes with nothing.
And she said, "You know, the poverty wasn't so bad. It was the humiliation and the embarrassment of it all."
In 2001, her life changed.
She had a girlfriend who had heard about this organization, Jamii Bora, that would lend money to people no matter how poor you were, as long as you provided a commensurate amount in savings.
And so she spent a year to save 50 dollars, and started borrowing, and over time she was able to buy a sewing machine.
She started tailoring.
And that turned into what she does now, which is to go into the secondhand clothing markets, and for about three dollars and 25 cents she buys an old ball gown.
Some of them might be ones you gave.
And she repurposes them with frills and ribbons, and makes these frothy confections that she sells to women for their daughter's Sweet 16 or first Holy Communion -- those milestones in a life that people want to celebrate all along the economic spectrum.
And she does really good business. In fact, I watched her walk through the streets hawking. And before you knew it, there was a crowd of women around her, buying these dresses.
And I reflected, as I was watching her sell the dresses, and also the jewelry that she makes, that now Jane makes more than four dollars a day.
And by many definitions she is no longer poor.
But she still lives in Mathare Valley.
And so she can't move out.
She lives with all of that insecurity, and in fact, in January, during the ethnic riots, she was chased from her home and had to find a new shack in which she would live.
Jamii Bora understands that and understands that when we're talking about poverty, we've got to look at people all along the economic spectrum.
And so with patient capital from Acumen and other organizations, loans and investments that will go the long term with them, they built a low-cost housing development, about an hour outside Nairobi central.
And they designed it from the perspective of customers like Jane herself, insisting on responsibility and accountability.
So she has to give 10 percent of the mortgage -- of the total value, or about 400 dollars in savings.
And then they match her mortgage to what she paid in rent for her little shanty.
And in the next couple of weeks, she's going to be among the first 200 families to move into this development.
When I asked her if she feared anything, or whether she would miss anything from Mathare, she said, "What would I fear that I haven't confronted already?
I'm HIV positive. I've dealt with it all."
And she said, "What would I miss?
You think I will miss the violence or the drugs? The lack of privacy?
Do you think I'll miss not knowing if my children are going to come home at the end of the day?" She said "If you gave me 10 minutes my bags would be packed."
I said, "Well what about your dreams?"
And she said, "Well, you know, my dreams don't look exactly like I thought they would when I was a little girl.
But if I think about it, I thought I wanted a husband, but what I really wanted was a family that was loving. And I fiercely love my children, and they love me back."
She said, "I thought that I wanted to be a doctor, but what I really wanted to be was somebody who served and healed and cured.
And so I feel so blessed with everything that I have, that two days a week I go and I counsel HIV patients.
And I say, 'Look at me. You are not dead.
You are still alive. And if you are still alive you have to serve.'" And she said, "I'm not a doctor who gives out pills.
But maybe me, I give out something better because I give them hope."
And in the middle of this economic crisis, where so many of us are inclined to pull in with fear, I think we're well suited to take a cue from Jane and reach out, recognizing that being poor doesn't mean being ordinary.
Because when systems are broken, like the ones that we're seeing around the world, it's an opportunity for invention and for innovation.
It's an opportunity to truly build a world where we can extend services and products to all human beings, so that they can make decisions and choices for themselves.
I truly believe it's where dignity starts.
We owe it to the Janes of the world.
And just as important, we owe it to ourselves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Upon emerging from stasis, Ethic is the unfortunate recipient of three surprises.
The first: a prison cell.
The second: complete amnesia.
And the third: a mysterious stranger has gotten stuck squeezing through the bars on her window.
His name is Hedge, and he has come to help Ethic save the world.
But first they have to break out of jail.
Hedge turns his hand into a lockpick and outlines the challenge ahead.
Each lock in the prison works in the same unusual way.
Inside the keyhole is a red dial that can be rotated to one of 100 positions numbered 1 through 100.
The key for a given cell spins the dial to the right position, which, when stopped there, makes it turn green and unlocks the door.
It would be out of the question to steal keys from a guard, but Hedge has a better idea.
Hedge can carry out Ethics commands.
If Ethic tells him to walk 5 steps forward, turn right, then walk another 5 steps, thats exactly what hell do.
Hedge needs specific instructions though.
If Ethic says pick the lock or try every combination that would be too vague, but spin the dial 5 positions forward would work.
Once out of the cell, they will only have a few moments to crack the lock for the outer prison door too before the guards catch them.
So what instructions will allow Hedge to efficiently open any door?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
Before we explain the solution, heres a hint.
A key programming concept that can help unlock the door is called a loop.
This can be one or more instructions that Hedge will iterate or repeat a specified number of times, like jump up and down 100 times. Or an instruction that Hedge will repeat until a condition is met, such as keep jumping up and down until its 7 oclock. Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
The first thing thats clear is that you need to find a way for Hedge to try every combination until one works.
What takes a little more effort is how exactly you do so.
One solution would be to instruct Hedge to try every combination in succession.
Try 1 and check the light.
If it turns green, open the door, and if not, try 2.
If that doesnt work try 3. All the way up to 100.
But it would be tedious to lay that out in its entirety.
Why write more than 100 lines of code, when you can do the same thing with just 3?
This is where a loop comes in.
There are a few ways to go about this.
The lock has 100 positions, so Ethic could say Check the dials color, then spin the dial forward once, for 100 repetitions.
Remember where the dial turns green, then have Hedge set it back to that number. A loop like this, where you specify the number of times it repeats, is called a for" loop.
But an even more efficient loop would have Hedge spin the dial one position at a time until it turns green and as soon as that happens, have him stop and open the door.
That way if the door unlocks on 1, he doesnt need to cycle through all the rest of the numbers.
This is an until loop, because it involves doing an action until a condition is met.
A similar, alternate approach would be to turn the dial while its still red, then stop.
Thats called a while loop.
Back to the adventure.
Hedge loops through the combinations, and the cell opens at 41.
Ethic and Hedge wait until the perfect moment in the guards rotation and make a break for it.
Soon, Ethic faces a choice: hide inside a mysterious crystal, or try to crack the outer door and make a run for it.
Ethic chooses to run.
The second door takes Hedge longer, requiring him to spin all the way to 93.
But he gets it open and takes the opportunity to explain why hes rescued Ethic.
The world is in turmoil: robots have taken over, and only Ethic can set things right.
In order to do so, theyll need to collect three powerful artifacts that are being used for nefarious purposes across the land.
Only then can Ethic return to the world machine that giant crystal to set things right.
Ethic may have escaped the prison but what has she gotten herself into?
The Earth is 4.6 billion years old, but a human lifetime often lasts for less than 100 years.
So why care about the history of our planet when the distant past seems so inconsequential to everyday life?
You see, as far as we can tell, Earth is the only planet in our solar system known to have sparked life, and the only system able to provide life support for human beings.
So why Earth?
We know Earth is unique for having plate tectonics, liquid water on its surface and an oxygen-rich atmosphere.
But this has not always been the case, and we know this because ancient rocks have recorded the pivotal moments in Earth's planetary evolution.
And one of the best places to observe those ancient rocks is in the Pilbara of Western Australia.
The rocks here are 3.5 billion years old, and they contain some of the oldest evidence for life on the planet.
Now, often when we think of early life, we might imagine a stegosaurus or maybe a fish crawling onto land.
But the early life that I'm talking about is simple microscopic life, like bacteria.
And their fossils are often preserved as layered rock structures, called stromatolites.
This simple form of life is almost all we see in the fossil record for the first three billion years of life on Earth.
Our species can only be traced back in the fossil record to a few hundred thousand years ago.
We know from the fossil record, bacteria life had grabbed a strong foothold by about 3.5 to four billion years ago.
The rocks older than this have been either destroyed or highly deformed through plate tectonics.
So what remains a missing piece of the puzzle is exactly when and how life on Earth began.
Here again is that ancient volcanic landscape in the Pilbara.
Little did I know that our research here would provide another clue to that origin-of-life puzzle.
It was on my first field trip here, toward the end of a full, long week mapping project, that I came across something rather special.
Now, what probably looks like a bunch of wrinkly old rocks are actually stromatolites.
And at the center of this mound was a small, peculiar rock about the size of a child's hand.
It took six months before we inspected this rock under a microscope, when one of my mentors at the time, Malcolm Walter, suggested the rock resembled geyserite.
Geyserite is a rock type that only forms in and around the edges of hot spring pools.
Now, in order for you to understand the significance of geyserite, I need to take you back a couple of centuries.
In 1871, in a letter to his friend Joseph Hooker, Charles Darwin suggested: "What if life started in some warm little pond with all sort of chemicals still ready to undergo more complex changes?"
Well, we know of warm little ponds. We call them "hot springs."
In these environments, you have hot water dissolving minerals from the underlying rocks.
This solution mixes with organic compounds and results in a kind of chemical factory, which researchers have shown can manufacture simple cellular structures that are the first steps toward life.
But 100 years after Darwin's letter, deep-sea hydrothermal vents, or hot vents, were discovered in the ocean.
And these are also chemical factories.
This one is located along the Tonga volcanic arc, 1,100 meters below sea level in the Pacific Ocean.
The black smoke that you see billowing out of these chimneylike structures is also mineral-rich fluid, which is being fed off by bacteria.
And since the discovery of these deep-sea vents, the favored scenario for an origin of life has been in the ocean.
And this is for good reason: deep-sea vents are well-known in the ancient rock record, and it's thought that the early Earth had a global ocean and very little land surface.
So the probability that deep-sea vents were abundant on the very early Earth fits well with an origin of life in the ocean.
However ...
our research in the Pilbara provides and supports an alternative perspective.
After three years, finally, we were able to show that, in fact, our little rock was geyserite.
So this conclusion suggested not only did hot springs exist in our 3.5 billion-year-old volcano in the Pilbara, but it pushed back evidence for life living on land in hot springs in the geological record of Earth by three billion years.
And so, from a geological perspective, Darwin's warm little pond is a reasonable origin-of-life candidate.
Of course, it's still debatable how life began on Earth, and it probably always will be.
But it is clear that it's flourished; it has diversified, and it has become ever more complex.
Eventually, it reached the age of the human, a species that has begun to question its own existence and the existence of life elsewhere: Is there a cosmic community waiting to connect with us, or are we all there is?
A clue to this puzzle again comes from the ancient rock record.
At about 2.5 billion years ago, there is evidence that bacteria had begun to produce oxygen, kind of like plants do today.
Geologists refer to the period that followed as the Great Oxidation Event.
It is implied from rocks called banded iron formations, many of which can be observed as hundreds-of-meter-thick packages of rock which are exposed in gorges that carve their way through the Karijini National Park in Western Australia.
The arrival of free oxygen allowed two major changes to occur on our planet.
First, it allowed complex life to evolve.
You see, life needs oxygen to get big and complex.
And it produced the ozone layer, which protects modern life from the harmful effects of the sun's UVB radiation.
So in an ironic twist, microbial life made way for complex life, and in essence, relinquished its three-billion-year reign over the planet.
Today, we humans dig up fossilized complex life and burn it for fuel.
This practice pumps vast amounts of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, and like our microbial predecessors, we have begun to make substantial changes to our planet.
And the effects of those are encompassed by global warming.
Unfortunately, the ironic twist here could see the demise of humanity.
And so maybe the reason we aren't connecting with life elsewhere, intelligent life elsewhere, is that once it evolves, it extinguishes itself quickly.
If the rocks could talk, I suspect they might say this: life on Earth is precious.
It is the product of four or so billion years of a delicate and complex co-evolution between life and Earth, of which humans only represent the very last speck of time.
You can use this information as a guide or a forecast -- or an explanation as to why it seems so lonely in this part of the galaxy.
But use it to gain some perspective about the legacy that you want to leave behind on the planet that you call home.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For millennia, the people of Britain had been using bronze to make tools and jewelry, and as a currency for trade.
But around 800 BCE, that began to change: the value of bronze declined, causing social upheaval and an economic crisis what we would call a recession today.
What causes recessions?
This question has long been the subject of heated debate among economists, and for good reason.
A recession can be a mild decline in economic activity in a single country that lasts months, a long-lasting downturn with global ramifications that last years, or anything in between.
Complicating matters further, there are countless variables that contribute to an economys health, making it difficult to pinpoint specific causes.
So it helps to start with the big picture: recessions occur when there is a negative disruption to the balance between supply and demand.
Theres a mismatch between how many goods people want to buy, how many products and services producers can offer, and the price of the goods and services sold, which prompts an economic decline.
An economys relationship between supply and demand is reflected in its inflation rates and interest rates.
Inflation happens when goods and services get more expensive.
Put another way, the value of money decreases.
Still, inflation isnt necessarily a bad thing.
In fact, a low inflation rate is thought to encourage economic activity.
But high inflation that isnt accompanied with high demand can both cause problems for an economy and eventually lead to a recession.
Interest rates, meanwhile, reflect the cost of taking on debt for individuals and companies.
The rate is typically an annual percentage of a loan that borrowers pay to their creditors until the loan is repaid.
Low interest rates mean that companies can afford to borrow more money, which they can use to invest in more projects.
High interest rates, meanwhile, increase costs for producers and consumers, slowing economic activity.
Fluctuations in inflation and interest rates can give us insight into the health of the economy, but what causes these fluctuations in the first place?
The most obvious causes are shocks like natural disaster, war, and geopolitical factors.
An earthquake, for example, can destroy the infrastructure needed to produce important commodities such as oil.
That forces the supply side of the economy to charge more for products that use oil, discouraging demand and potentially prompting a recession.
But some recessions occur in times of economic prosperity possibly even because of economic prosperity.
Some economists believe that business activity from a markets expansion can occasionally reach an unsustainable level.
For example, corporations and consumers may borrow more money with the assumption that economic growth will help them handle the added burden.
But if the economy doesnt grow as quickly as expected, they may end up with more debt than they can manage.
To pay it off, theyll have to redirect funds from other activities, reducing business activity.
Psychology can also contribute to a recession.
Fear of a recession can become a self-fulfilling prophecy if it causes people to pull back investing and spending.
In response, producers might cut operating costs to help weather the expected decline in demand.
That can lead to a vicious cycle as cost cuts eventually lower wages, leading to even lower demand.
Even policy designed to help prevent recessions can contribute.
When times are tough, governments and central banks may print money, increase spending, and lower central bank interest rates.
Smaller lenders can in turn lower their interest rates, effectively making debt cheaper to boost spending.
But these policies are not sustainable and eventually need to be reversed to prevent excessive inflation.
That can cause a recession if people have become too reliant on cheap debt and government stimulus.
The Bronze recession in Britain eventually ended when the adoption of iron helped revolutionize farming and food production.
Modern markets are more complex, making todays recessions far more difficult to navigate.
But each recession provides new data to help anticipate and respond to future recessions more effectively.
Abandon all hope, ye who enter here  Inscribed above the Gate of Hell, these ominous words warn dark tidings for Dante as he begins his descent into inferno.
Yet despite the grim tone, this prophecy sets into motion what is perhaps the greatest love story ever told; an epic journey that encompasses both the human and the divine.
But for Dante to reach benevolent salvation, he must first find his way through Hell.
This landscape of torture is the setting for "Inferno," the first in a three-part narrative poem written by Dante Alighieri in the 14th century.
Casting himself as the protagonist, Dante travels deeper and deeper into Hells abyss, witnessing obscene punishments distinct to each of its nine realms.
Beginning in Limbo, he travels through the circles of Lust, Gluttony, Greed, Wrath, Heresy, Violence, and Fraud, to the horrific ninth circle of Treachery, where sinners are trapped under the watchful eyes of Satan himself.
The following two parts, "Purgatorio" and "Paradiso," continue Dantes journey, as he scales the Mount of Purgatory and ascends the nine celestial spheres of Heaven.
Written together over 10 years, these 3 sections comprise the "Divine Comedy" an allegorical imagining of the souls journey towards God.
But Dantes "Divine Comedy" is more than just religious allegory.
Its also a witty, scathing commentary on Italian politics.
A soldier and statesman from Florence, Dante was staunchly faithful to God, but often critical of the Roman Catholic Church.
He particularly disliked its rampant nepotism and practice of simony, the buying and selling of religious favours such as pardons from sin.
Many groups took advantage of these corrupt customs, but few supported them as much as the Guelfi Neri, or Black Guelphs.
This was a political and religious faction which sought to expand the popes political influence.
Dante was a member of the Guelfi Bianchi, or White Guelphs who believed Florence needed more freedom from Roman influence.
As a public representative for the White Guelphs, Dante frequently spoke out against the popes power, until the Black Guelphs leveraged their position to exile him from Florence in 1302.
But rather than silencing him, this lifelong exile led to Dantes greatest critique of all.
Dishonored and with little hope of return, the author freely aired his grievances with the Church and Italian society.
Writing the "Divine Comedy" in Italian, rather than the traditional Latin of the educated elite, Dante ensured the widest possible audience for his biting political commentary.
In the "Infernos" circle of the Wrathful, Dante eagerly witnesses sinners tear Black Guelph Filippo Argenti limb from limb.
In the circle of Fraud, Dante converses with a mysterious sinner burning in the circles hottest flames.
He learns that this is Pope Nicholas III, who tells Dante that his two successors will take his place when they die all three guilty of simony and corruption.
Despite the bleak and sometimes violent imagery in "Inferno," the "Divine Comedy" is also a love story.
Though Dante had an arranged marriage with the daughter of a powerful Florentine family, he had also been unrequitedly in love with another woman since he was nine years old: Beatrice Portinari.
Despite allegedly meeting just twice, she became Dantes lifelong muse, serving as the inspiration and subject for many of his works.
In fact, its Beatrice who launches his intrepid journey into the pits of Hell and up the terraces of Mount Purgatory.
Portrayed as a powerful, heavenly figure, she leads Dante through "Paradisos" concentric spheres of Heaven until he is finally face-to-face with God.
In the centuries since its publication, the "Divine Comedys" themes of love, sin, and redemption have been embraced by numerous artists from Auguste Rodin and Salvador Dali, to Ezra Pound and Neil Gaiman.
And the poet himself received his own belated, earthly redemption in 2008, when the city of Florence finally revoked Dantes antiquated exile.
I'm the weekly tech critic for the New York Times.
I review gadgets and stuff.
And mostly what good dads should be doing this time of year is nestling with their kids and decorating the Christmas tree.
What I'm mostly doing this year is going on cable TV and answering the same question: "What are the tech trends for next year?"
And I'm like, "Didn't we just go through this last year?"
But I'm going to pick the one that interests me most, and that is the completed marriage of the cell phone and the Internet.
You know, I found that volcano on Google Images, not realizing how much it makes me look like the cover of Dianetics.
(Laughter) Anyway, this all started a few years ago, when they started carrying your voice over the Internet rather than over a phone line, and we've come a long way since that.
But that was interesting in itself. This is companies like Vonage.
Basically you take an ordinary telephone, you plug it into this little box that they give you and the box plugs into your cable modem.
Now, it works just like a regular phone.
So you can pick up the phone, you hear a dial tone, but its just a fake-out. It's a WAV file of a dial tone, just to reassure you that the world hasn't ended.
It could be anything. It could be salsa music or a comedy routine -- it doesn't matter.
The little box has your phone number.
So that's really cool -- you can take it to London or Siberia, and your next door neighbor can dial your home number and your phone will ring, because it's got everything in the box.
They've got every feature known to man in there, because adding a new feature is just software.
And as a result of Voice Over IP -- I hate that term -- Voice Over Internet -- land-line home-phone service has gone down 30 percent in the last three years.
I mean, no self-respecting college kid has home phone service anymore.
This is what college kids are more likely to have. It's the most popular VOIP service in the world: It's Skype.
It's a free program you download for your Mac or PC, and you make free phone calls anywhere in the world The downside is that you have to wear a headset like a nerd.
It's not your phone -- it's your computer.
But nonetheless, if you're a college kid and you have no money, believe me, this is better than trying to use your cell phone.
It's really cute seeing middle-aged people like me, try out Skype for the first time, which is usually when their kid goes away for a semester abroad.
They don't want to pay the international fees, so they're like, "Timmy! Is that you?"
(Laughter) It's really cute.
But I -- at least it was when I did it -- (Laughter) I think where VOIP is really going to get interesting is when they start putting it on cell phones.
Imagine if you had an ordinary cell phone, and any time you were in a wireless hotspot -- free calls anywhere in the world, never pay the cellular company a nickel.
It'd be really, really cool -- and yet, even though the technology for this has been available for five years, incredibly, the number of standard cell phones offered by US carriers with free VOIP is zero!
I can't figure out why!
(Laughter) Actually, I need to update that. There's one now.
And it's so interesting that I thought I would tell you about it.
It comes from T-Mobile.
And I am not paid by T-Mobile.
I'm not plugging T-Mobile.
The New York Times has very rigid policies about that.
Ever since that Jayson Blair jerk ruined it for all of us.
(Laughter) Basically, the reason you haven't heard about this program is because it was introduced last year on June 29.
Does anyone remember what else happened on June 29 last year?
It was the iPhone. The iPhone came out that day.
I'm like, can you imagine being the T-Mobile PR lady? You know?
"Hi, we have an announcement to -- WAH!!!"
(Laughter) But it's actually really, really cool. You have a choice of phones, and we're not talking smartphones -- ordinary phones, including a Blackberry, that have Wi-Fi.
The deal is, any time you're in a Wi-Fi hotspot, all your calls are free.
And when you're out of the hotspot, you're on the regular cellular network.
You're thinking, "Well, how often am I in a hotspot?"
The answer is, "All the time!"
Because they give you a regular wireless router that works with the phone, for your house.
Which is really ingenious, because we all know that T-Mobile is the most pathetic carrier.
They have coverage like the size of my thumbnail.
(Laughter) But it's a hundred million dollars to put up one of those towers. Right?
They don't have that kind of money. Instead they give each of us a seven-dollar-and-95-cent box. They're like a stealth tower installation program.
We're putting it in our homes for them!
Anyway, they have Wi-Fi phones in Europe.
But the thing that T-Mobile did that nobody's done before is, when you're on a call an you move from Wi-Fi into cellular range, the call is handed off in mid-syllable, seamlessly. I'll show you the advanced technologies we use at the New York Times to test this gear.
This is me with a camcorder on a phone going like this.
(Laughter) As I walk out of the house from my Wi-Fi hotspot into the cellular network on a call with my wife -- look at the upper left. That's the Wi-Fi signal.
(Video): Jennifer Pogue: Hello?
David Pogue: Hi babes, it's me.
JP: Oh, hi darling, how are you?
DP: You're on Wi-Fi. How does it sound?
JP: Oh, it sounds pretty good.
Now, I'm leaving the house. DP: I'm going for a walk -- do you mind?
JP: No not at all. I'm having a great day with the kids.
DP: What are you guys doing?
Right there!
It just changed to the cellular tower in mid-call.
I don't know why my wife says I never listen to her. I don't get that.
(Laughter) The bottom line is that the boundaries, because of the Internet plus cell phone, are melting.
The cool thing about the T-Mobile phones is that although switching technologies is very advanced, the billing technology has not caught up.
So what I mean is that you can start a call in your house in the Wi-Fi hotspot, you can get in your car and talk until the battery's dead -- which would be like 10 minutes -- (Laughter) And the call will continue to be free.
Because they don't, they haven't -- well, no, wait! Not so fast.
It also works the other way.
So if you start a call on your cellular network and you come home, you keep being billed.
Which is why most people with this service get into the habit of saying, "Hey, I just got home. Can I call you right back?"
Now you get it.
It's also true that if you use one of these phones overseas, it doesn't know what Internet hotspot you're in.
On the Internet nobody knows you're a dog, right? Nobody knows you're in Pakistan.
You can make free unlimited calls home to the US with these phones. So, very, very interesting.
This is another favorite of mine.
Does anyone here have a working cell phone that's on, with coverage, who can make a call right now without a lot of fussing?
OK. Would you call me please right now? [Phone number given.] And don't you all call me at three a.m. asking me to fix your printer.
(Laughter) I have two cell phones, so this going to be very odd, if it works.
I should know not to do technology demos in front of an audience. It's just, like, absurd.
This one is going off. And -- oh, I have the ringer off. Tsh! Great.
Anyway, this one is also going off. So they're both ringing at the same time.
Excuse me one second.
Hello?
Oh. Where are you calling from?
No, no just kidding. There he is. Thank you very much for doing that.
I didn't even know it was you -- I was looking at this guy.
Oh great! Yeah. Yeah you can all stop calling now!
(Laughter) All right! We've made the point.
All right. Ringer off. Everyone wants in on the action.
(Laughter) So this is Grand Central at work -- it's a -- oh, for gods sake!
(Laughter) I have your numbers now!
(Laughter) You will pay.
Grand Central is this really brilliant idea where they give you a new phone number, and then at that point one phone number rings all your phones at once.
Your home phone, your work phone, your cell phone, your yacht phone (this is the EG crowd).
(Laughter) The beauty of that is you never miss a call.
I know a lot of you are like, "Ooh, I don't want to be reached at any hour."
But the beauty is it's all going through the internet, so you get all of these really cool features -- like you can say, I want these people to be able to call me only during these hours.
And I want these people to hear this greeting, "Hi boss, I'm out making us both some money. Leave a message."
And then your wife calls, and, "Hi honey, leave me a message."
Very, very customizable.
Google bought it, and they've been working on it for a year.
They're supposed to come out with it very shortly in a public method.
By the way, this is something that really bothers me.
I don't know if you realize this. When you call 411 on your cell phone, they charge you two bucks.
Did you know that? It's an outrage.
I actually got a photograph of the Verizon employee right there.
I'm going to tell you how to avoid that now.
What you're going to use is Google Cellular.
It's totally free -- there's not even ads.
If you know how to send a text message, you can get the same information for free.
I'm about to change your life. So here's me doing it.
You send a text message to the word "Google," which turns out to be 46645.
Leave off the last "e" for savings.
Anyway, so lets say you need a drugstore near Chicago.
You type "pharmacy Chicago," or the zip code.
You hit send, and in five seconds, they will send you back the two closest drugstores, complete with name address and phone number.
Here it comes.
And it's already written down -- so, like, if you're driving, you don't have to do one of these things, "Uh huh, uh huh, uh huh."
It works with weather, too.
You can say "Weather," and the name of the city you're going to travel to.
And then in five seconds, they send you back the complete weather forecast for that town.
Shortly I'll tell you why I was in Milan.
Here we go. And those are just the beginning.
These are all the different things that you can text to Google and they will -- yeah! You're all trying to write this down.
That's cute. I do have an email address. You can just ask me.
It's absolutely phenomenal. The only downside is that it requires you to know how to text -- send a text message. Nobody over 40 knows how to do that.
So I'm going to teach you something even better.
This is called Google Info.
They've just launched this voice-activated version of the same thing.
It's speech recognition like you've never heard before.
So lets say I'm in Monterey, and I want what?
I want to find what? Bagels. OK.
Google: Say the business and the city and state.
DP: Bagels, Monterey, California.
I got the Chinese line.
(Laughter) Google: Bagels, Monterey, California.
Top eight results: Number one, Bagel Bakery on El Dorado Street.
To select number one, you can press one or say "number one."
Number two: Bagel Bakery, commissary department.
Number Two. Number Two. Two.
(Laughter) Why do I listen to people in the audience?
Well anyway -- oh! Here we go!
Google: ... commissary department on McClellan Avenue, Monterey.
I'll connect you, or say "details," or "go back."
DP: He's connecting me! He doesn't even tell me the phone number.
He's just connecting me directly. It's like having a personal valet.
Google: Hold on.
(Laughter) DP: Hi, could I have 400 with a schmear?
No, no, no -- just kidding, no no.
So anyway, you never even find out the number.
It's just so amazing.
And it has incredible, incredible accuracy.
This is even more amazing. Put this in your speed dial.
This you can ask by voice any question.
Who won the 1958 World Series?
What's the recipe for a certain cocktail?
It's absolutely amazing -- and they text you back the answer.
I tried this this morning just to make sure it's still alive.
"Which actors have played James Bond?"
They text me back this: "Sean Connery, George Lazenby, Roger Moore, Timothy Dalton, Pierce Brosnan, Daniel Craig."
Right! And then I was trying to pretend I was like a Valley girl.
I'm like, "What's the word that means you know, like, when the sun, the moon and the earth are, like, all in a line?"
Just to see how the recognition was.
They texted me back, "It's called a syzygy."
Which I knew, because it's the word that won me the Ohio spelling bee in 1976.
You know, there's a lot of people wondering, "How on earth are they going to make money doing this?" And the answer is: look at the last line.
They put this teeny-weeny little ad, about 10 characters long.
And a lot of people also want to know, "How does it work?
How can it be so good? It's as though there is a human being on the other end of the line."
Because there is one!
They have 10,000 people who are being paid 20 cents per answer.
As you can imagine, it's college kids and old people.
That's who can afford to do that.
But it's a human being on the line. And it's gotten me out of so many tough positions like, "When's the last flight out of Chicago?"
You know. It's just absolutely amazing.
Another thing that really bothers me about cell phones today -- this is probably my biggest pet peeve in all of technology.
When I call to leave you a message, I get 15 seconds of instructions from a third-grade teacher on Ambien!
(Laughter) "To page this person ... " Page? What is this, 1975?
Nobody has pagers anymore.
"You may begin speaking at the tone.
When you have finished recording, you may hang up." No!
(Laughter) And then it gets worse: when I call to retrieve my messages, first of all: "You have 87 messages.
To listen to your messages ... " Why else am I calling?
(Laughter) Of course I want to listen to the messages!
(Laughter) Oh! You all have cell phones too.
So last year I went to Milan, Italy, and I got to speak to an audience of cellular executives from 200 countries around the world.
And I said as a joke -- as a joke, I said, "I did the math. Verizon has 70 million customers.
If you check your voicemail twice a day, that's 100 million dollars a year.
I bet you guys are doing this just to run up our airtime, aren't you?"
No chuckle. They're like this -- (Laughter) Where is the outrage, people? Rise up!
(Laughter) Sorry. I'm not bitter.
(Laughter) So now I'm going to tell you how to get out of that.
There are these services that transcribe your voicemail into text.
And they send it either to your email or as text messages to your phone.
It is a life-changer.
And by the way, they don't always get the words right, because it's over the phone and all that.
So they attach the audio file at the bottom of the email so you can listen to double-check.
The services are called things like Spinvox, Phonetag -- this is the one I use -- Callwave. A lot of people say, "How are they doing this?
I don't really want people listening in to my calls."
The executives at these companies told me, "Well we use a proprietary B-to-B, best-of-breed, peer-to-peer soluti -- " you know.
I think basically it's like these guys in India with headsets, you know, listening in.
The reason I think that is that on the first day I tried one of these services, I got two voicemail messages. One was from a guy named Michael Stevenson, which shouldn't be that hard to transcribe, and it was misspelled.
The other was from my video producer at the Times, whose name is Vijaiy Singh, with the silent 'h'. Nailed that one.
(Laughter) So you be the judge.
(Laughter) Anyway, this service, Callwave, promises that it's all software -- nobody is listening to your messages.
And they also promise that they're going to transcribe only the gist of your messages.
(Laughter) So I thought I'd see how that goes.
This is me testing it out.
(Video): Hello, this is Michael.
Hope you're doing well. I'm fine here. Everything's good.
Hey, I was walking along the street and the sky was blue.
And your daughter broke her leg at soccer practice.
I'm going to have a sandwich for lunch.
She's in room -- emergency room 53W.
OK, talk to you later -- bye.
(Laughter) I love my job.
(Laughter) So a couple minutes later, this I got by email.
It's a very good transcription. But a couple minutes after that, I got the text message version. Now remember, a text message can only be 160 characters long.
So it had better be the gist of the gist, right?
I'm not kidding you. The message said, "Was walking along the street" and "sky was blue" and "emergency"!
(Laughter) What the f -- ?
(Laughter) Well I guess that was the gist.
(Laughter) And lastly, I just have to talk about this one.
This is my favorite of all time. It's called Popularitydialer.com.
Basically, you're going to go on some iffy date, or a potentially bad meeting.
So you go and you type in your phone number, and at the exact minute where you want to be called -- (Laughter) And at that moment your phone will ring.
And you're like, "I'm sorry. I've got to take this."
The really beautiful thing is, you know how when somebody's sitting next to you, sometimes they can sort of hear a little bit of the caller.
So they give you a choice of what you want to hear on the other end.
Here's the girlfriend.
Phone: Hey you, what's going on?
DP: I'm kinda, like, giving a talk right now.
Phone: Well, that's good.
DP: What are you doing?
Phone: I was just wondering what you were up to.
DP: Right, I can't really talk right now.
This is the -- I love this -- the boss call.
Phone: Hey, this is Mr. Johnson calling from the office.
DP: Oh, hi, sir.
Phone: Did you complete that thing about a month ago? That photocopier training?
DP: Oh -- sorry I forgot.
Phone: Yeah, well so when was the last time you used the photocopier?
DP: It was like three weeks ago.
Phone: Well, I don't know if you heard, you might have heard from Lenny, but -- (Laughter) I think the biggest change when Internet met phone was with the iPhone.
Not my finest moment in New York Times journalism.
It was when in the fall of 2006, I explained why Apple would never do a cell phone.
(Laughter) I looked like a moron. However, my logic was good, because -- I don't know if you realize this, but -- until the iPhone came along, the carriers -- Verizon, AT&amp;T, Cingular -- held veto power over every aspect of every design of every phone.
I know the people who worked on the Treo.
They went around to these carriers and said, "Look at these cool features." And Verizon is like, "Hmm, no.
I don't think so."
It was not very conducive to innovation.
What I didn't anticipate was that Steve Jobs went around and said, "Tell you what -- I'll give you a five-year exclusive if you'll let me design this phone in peace -- and you won't even see it till it's done."
Actually, even so, he was turned down by Verizon and others.
Finally Cingular said OK.
I'm going to talk about the effect of the iPhone.
Please don't corner me at the party tonight and go, "What are you? An Apple fan boy?"
- you know. I'm not.
You can see what I said about it. It's a flawed masterpiece.
It's got bad things and good things. Lets all acknowledge that right now.
But it did change a few things. The first thing it changed was that all those carriers saw that they sold 10 million of these things in a year.
And they said, "Oh my gosh, maybe we've been doing it wrong.
Maybe we should let phone designers design the phones."
(Applause) Another thing was that it let 10 million people, for the first time, experience being online all the time.
Not using these 60-dollar-a-month cellular cards for their laptops.
I don't understand why we're not there yet.
When I'm an old man, I'm going to tell my grandchildren, "When I was your age, if I wanted to check my email, I used to drive around town looking for a coffee shop. I did!"
(Laughter) "We had wireless base stations that could broadcast -- yay, about 150 feet across."
(Laughter) It's absurd. We have power outlets in every room of every building. We have running water.
What's the problem?
Anyway -- but this teaches people what it's like.
You have to go to YouTube and type in "iPhone Shuffle."
This guy did a mock video of one that's one inch square, like the real iPod Shuffle.
It's like, "It only has one button.
Touch it and it dials a number at random."
(Laughter) "Who the hell is this?"
(Laughter) But the other thing it did is it opened up this idea of an app store.
It downloads right to the phone.
And you can use the tilt sensor to steer this car using this game.
These programs can use all the components of the iPhone -- the touch screen.
This is the Etch-A-Sketch program -- the theme of EG 2008.
You know how you erase it?
Of course. You shake it.
Right, of course. We shake it to erase, like this.
They have 10,000 of these programs.
This is the translator program. They have every language in the world.
You type in what you want, and it gives you the translation.
This is amazing. This is Midomi.
A song is running through your head -- you sing it into the thing: do do do do do, da da da da da da, da dum ...
OK, you tap, "Done" and it will find out the song and play it for you.
I know. It's insane, right?
This is Pandora. Free Internet radio. Not just free Internet radio -- you type in a band or a song name.
It will immediately play you that song or that band.
It has a thumbs-up and a thumbs-down.
You say if you like this song or not.
If you like it, it tries another song on you from a different band, with the same instrumentation, vocals, theme and tempo.
If you like that one, or don't like it, you do thumbs-up and thumbs-down. Over time it tailors the songs so that it completely stops playing bad songs.
It eventually only plays songs you like.
This is Urbanspoon. You're in a city. It knows from GPS where you're standing.
You want to find a place to eat. You shake it.
It proposes a restaurant.
It gives you the price, and the location and ratings.
Video: I'm not going all the way to Flushing.
Anyway, just amazing, amazing things.
Of course, its not just about the iPhone.
The iPhone broke the dyke, the wall.
But now it's everybody else. So Google has done their own Android operating system that will soon be on handsets -- phones from 34 companies.
Touch screen -- very, very nice.
Also with its own app store, where you can download programs.
This is amazing. In the wake of all this, Verizon, the most calcified, corporate, conservative carrier of all, said, "You can use any phone you want on our network."
I love the Wired headline: Pigs Fly, Hell Freezes Over and Verizon Opens Up Its Network -- No. Really.
So everything is changing. We've entered a new world of innovation, where the cell phone becomes your laptop, customized the way you want it.
Every cell phone is unique. There is software that you can add on.
Can I do one more one-minute song? Thank you.
(Applause) Just to round it up -- this is the new Apple Power Music Stand.
It's only three pounds, or 12 if you install Microsoft Office.
(Laughter) Sorry, that was mean.
This is a song I did for the New York Times website as a music video.
Ladies and gentlemen, for seven blissful hours it was the number one video on YouTube.
(To the tune of "My Way") And now the end is near.
I'm sick to death of this old cell phone.
Bad sound, the signal's weak, the software stinks.
A made-in-Hell phone.
I've heard there's something new -- a million times more rad than my phone.
I too will join the cult.
I want an iPhone.
Concerns -- I have a few. It's got some flaws; we may just face it.
No keys, no memory card, the battery's sealed -- you can't replace it.
But God, this thing is sweet.
A multitouch, iPod, Wi-Fi phone.
You had me from, "Hello."
I want an iPhone.
I want to touch its precious screen.
I want to wipe the smudges clean.
I want my friends to look and drool.
I want to say, "Look -- now I'm cool" I stood in line and I'll get mine.
I want an iPhone.
For what is a man?
What has he got? If not iPhone, then he's got squat.
It's all the things a phone should be.
Who cares if it's AT&amp;T?
I took a stand, paid half a grand!
And I got an iPhone!
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So ... we're in a real live war at the moment, and it's a war that we're truly losing.
It's a war on superbugs.
So you might wonder, if I'm going to talk about superbugs, why I'm showing you a photograph of some soccer fans -- Liverpool soccer fans celebrating a famous victory in Istanbul, a decade ago.
In the back, in the red shirt, well, that's me, and next to me in the red hat, that's my friend Paul Rice.
So a couple of years after this picture was taken, Paul went into hospital for some minor surgery, and he developed a superbug-related infection, and he died.
And I was truly shocked.
He was a healthy guy in the prime of life.
So there and then, and actually with a lot of encouragement from a couple of TEDsters, I declared my own personal war on superbugs.
So let's talk about superbugs for a moment.
The story actually starts in the 1940s with the widespread introduction of antibiotics.
And since then, drug-resistant bacteria have continued to emerge, and so we've been forced to develop newer and newer drugs to fight these new bacteria.
And this vicious cycle actually is the origin of superbugs, which is simply bacteria for which we don't have effective drugs.
I'm sure you'll recognize at least some of these superbugs.
These are the more common ones around today.
Last year, around 700,000 people died from superbug-related diseases.
Looking to the future, if we carry on on the path we're going, which is basically a drugs-based approach to the problem, the best estimate by the middle of this century is that the worldwide death toll from superbugs will be 10 million.
10 million.
Just to put that in context, that's actually more than the number of people that died of cancer worldwide last year.
So it seems pretty clear that we're not on a good road, and the drugs-based approach to this problem is not working.
I'm a physicist, and so I wondered, could we take a physics-based approach -- a different approach to this problem.
And in that context, the first thing we know for sure, is that we actually know how to kill every kind of microbe, every kind of virus, every kind of bacteria.
And that's with ultraviolet light.
We've actually known this for more than 100 years.
I think you all know what ultraviolet light is.
It's part of a spectrum that includes infrared, it includes visible light, and the short-wavelength part of this group is ultraviolet light.
The key thing from our perspective here is that ultraviolet light kills bacteria by a completely different mechanism from the way drugs kill bacteria.
So ultraviolet light is just as capable of killing a drug-resistant bacteria as any other bacteria, and because ultraviolet light is so good at killing all bugs, it's actually used a lot these days to sterilize rooms, sterilize working surfaces.
What you see here is a surgical theater being sterilized with germicidal ultraviolet light.
But what you don't see in this picture, actually, is any people, and there's a very good reason for that.
Ultraviolet light is actually a health hazard, so it can damage cells in our skin, cause skin cancer, it can damage cells in our eye, cause eye diseases like cataract.
So you can't use conventional, germicidal, ultraviolet light when there are people are around.
And of course, we want to sterilize mostly when there are people around.
So the ideal ultraviolet light would actually be able to kill all bacteria, including superbugs, but would be safe for human exposure.
And actually that's where my physics background kicked into this story.
Together with my physics colleagues, we realized there actually is a particular wavelength of ultraviolet light that should kill all bacteria, but should be safe for human exposure.
That wavelength is called far-UVC light, and it's just the short-wavelength part of the ultraviolet spectrum.
So let's see how that would work.
What you're seeing here is the surface of our skin, and I'm going to superimpose on that some bacteria in the air above the skin.
Now we're going to see what happens when conventional, germicidal, ultraviolet light impinges on this.
So what you see is, as we know, germicidal light is really good at killing bacteria, but what you also see is that it penetrates into the upper layers of our skin, and it can damage those key cells in our skin which ultimately, when damaged, can lead to skin cancer.
So let's compare now with far-UVC light -- same situation, skin and some bacteria in the air above them.
So what you're seeing now is that again, far-UVC light's perfectly fine at killing bacteria, but what far-UVC light can't do is penetrate into our skin.
And there's a good, solid physics reason for that: far-UVC light is incredibly, strongly absorbed by all biological materials, so it simply can't go very far.
Now, viruses and bacteria are really, really, really small, so the far-UVC light can certainly penetrate them and kill them, but what it can't do is penetrate into skin, and it can't even penetrate the dead-cell area right at the very surface of our skin.
So far-UVC light should be able to kill bacteria, but kill them safely.
So that's the theory.
It should work, should be safe.
What about in practice?
Does it really work?
Is it really safe?
So that's actually what our lab has been working on the past five or six years, and I'm delighted to say the answer to both these questions is an emphatic yes.
Yes, it does work, but yes, it is safe.
So I'm delighted to say that, but actually I'm not very surprised to say that, because it's purely the laws of physics at work.
So let's look to the future.
I'm thrilled that we now have a completely new weapon, and I should say an inexpensive weapon, in our fight against superbugs.
For example, I see far-UVC lights in surgical theaters.
I see far-UVC lights in food preparation areas.
And in terms of preventing the spread of viruses, I see far-UVC lights in schools, preventing the spread of influenza, preventing the spread of measles, and I see far-UVC lights in airports or airplanes, preventing the global spread of viruses like H1N1 virus.
So back to my friend Paul Rice.
He was actually a well-known and well-loved local politician in his and my hometown of Liverpool, and they put up a statue in his memory in the center of Liverpool, and there it is.
But me, I want Paul's legacy to be a major advance in this war against superbugs.
Armed with the power of light, that's actually within our grasp.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Stay up here, David, I've got a question for you.
(Applause) David, tell us where you're up to in developing this, and what are the remaining obstacles to trying to roll out and realize this dream?
David Brenner: Well, I think we now know that it kills all bacteria, but we sort of knew that before we started, but we certainly tested that.
So we have to do lots and lots of tests about safety, and so it's more about safety than it is about efficacy.
And we need to do short-term tests, and we need to do long-term tests to make sure you can't develop melanoma many years on.
So those studies are pretty well done at this point.
The FDA of course is something we have to deal with, and rightly so, because we certainly can't use this in the real world without FDA approval.
CA: Are you trying to launch first in the US, or somewhere else?
DB: Actually, in a couple of countries.
In Japan and in the US, both.
CA: Have you been able to persuade biologists, doctors, that this is a safe approach?
DB: Well, as you can imagine, there is a certain skepticism because everybody knows that UV light is not safe.
So when somebody comes along and says, "Well, this particular UV light is safe," there is a barrier to be crossed, but the data are there, and I think that's what we're going to be standing on.
CA: Well, we wish you well.
This is potentially such important work.
Thank you so much for sharing this with us.
Thank you, David.
(Applause)
Hello.
My name is Herman, and I've always been struck by how the most important, impactful, tsunami-like changes to our culture and our society always come from those things that we least think are going to have that impact.
I mean, as a computer scientist, I remember when Facebook was just image-sharing in dorm rooms, and depending upon who you ask, it's now involved in toppling elections.
I remember when cryptocurrency or automated trading were sort of ideas by a few renegades in the financial institutions in the world for automated trading, or online, for cryptocurrency, and they're now coming to quickly shape the way that we operate.
And I think each of you can recall that moment where one of these ideas felt like some ignorable, derisive thing, and suddenly, oh, crap, the price of Bitcoin is what it is.
Or, oh, crap, guess who's been elected.
The reality is that, you know, from my perspective, I think that we're about to encounter that again.
And I think one of the biggest, most impactful changes in the way we live our lives, to the ways we're educated, probably even to how we end up making an income, is about to come not from AI, not from space travel or biotech -- these are all very important future inventions -- but in the next five years, I think it's going to come from video games.
So that's a bold claim, OK.
I see some skeptical faces in the audience.
But if we take a moment to try to look at what video games are already becoming in our lives today, and what just a little bit of technological advancement is about to create, it starts to become more of an inevitability.
And I think the possibilities are quite electrifying.
So let's just take a moment to think about scale.
I mean, there's already 2.6 billion people who play games.
And the reality is that's a billion more than five years ago.
A billion more people in that time.
No religion, no media, nothing has spread like that.
And there's likely to be a billion more when Africa and India gain the infrastructure to sort of fully realize the possibilities of gaming.
But what I find really special is -- and this often shocks a lot of people -- is that the average age of a gamer, like, have a guess, think about it.
It's not six, it's not 18, it's not 12.
It's 34.
[Average age of an American gamer] It's older than me.
And that tells us something, that this isn't entertainment for children anymore.
This is already a medium like literature or anything else that's becoming a fundamental part of our lives.
One stat I like is that people who generally picked up gaming in the last sort of 15, 20 years generally don't stop.
Something changed in the way that this medium is organized.
And more than that, it's not just play anymore, right?
You've heard some examples today, but people are earning an income playing games.
And not in the obvious ways.
Yes, there's e-sports, there's prizes, there's the opportunity to make money in a competitive way.
But there's also people earning incomes modding games, building content in them, doing art in them.
I mean, there's something at a scale akin to the Florentine Renaissance, happening on your kid's iPhone in your living room.
And it's being ignored.
Now, what's even more exciting for me is what's about to happen.
And when you think about gaming, you're probably already imagining that it features these massive, infinite worlds, but the truth is, games have been deeply limited for a very long time in a way that kind of we in the industry have tried very hard to cover up with as much trickery as possible.
The metaphor I like to use, if you'd let me geek out for a moment, is the notion of a theater.
For the last 10 years, games have massively advanced the visual effects, the physical immersion, the front end of games.
But behind the scenes, the actual experiential reality of a game world has remained woefully limited.
I'll put that in perspective for a moment.
I could leave this theater right now, I could do some graffiti, get in a fight, fall in love.
I might actually do all of those things after this, but the point is that all of that would have consequence.
It would ripple through reality -- all of you could interact with that at the same time.
It would be persistent.
And those are very important qualities to what makes the real world real.
Now, behind the scenes in games, we've had a limit for a very long time.
And the limit is, behind the visuals, the actual information being exchanged between players or entities in a single game world has been deeply bounded by the fact that games mostly take place on a single server or a single machine.
Even The World of Warcraft is actually thousands of smaller worlds.
When you hear about concerts in Fortnite, you're actually hearing about thousands of small concerts.
You know, individual, as was said earlier today, campfires or couches.
There isn't really this possibility to bring it all together.
Let's take a moment to just really understand what that means.
When you look at a game, you might see this, beautiful visuals, all of these things happening in front of you.
But behind the scenes in an online game, this is what it looks like.
To a computer scientist, all you see is just a little bit of information being exchanged by a tiny handful of meaningful entities or objects.
You might be thinking, "I've played in an infinite world."
Well it's more that you've played on a treadmill.
As you've been walking through that world, we've been cleverly causing the parts of it that you're not in to vanish, and the parts of it in front of you to appear.
A good trick, but not the basis for the revolution that I promised you in the beginning of this talk.
But the reality is, for those of you that are passionate gamers and might be excited about this, and for those of you that are afraid and may not be, all of that is about to change.
Because finally, the technology is in place to go well beyond the limits that we've previously seen.
I've dedicated my career to this, there are many others working on the problem -- I'd hardly take credit for it myself, but we're at the point now where we can finally do this impossible hard thing of weaving together thousands of disparate machines into single simulations that are convenient enough to not be one-offs, but to be buildable by anybody.
And to be at the point where we can start to experience those things that we can't yet fathom.
Let's just take a moment to visualize that.
I'm talking about not individual little simulations but a massive possibility of huge networks of interaction.
Massive global events that can happen inside that.
Things that even in the real world become challenging to produce at that kind of scale.
And I know some of you are gamers, so I'm going to show you some footage of some things that I'm pretty sure I'm allowed to do, from some of our partners.
TED and me had a back-and-forth on this.
These are a few things that not many people have seen before, some new experiences powered by this type of technology.
I'll just [take] a moment to show you some of this stuff.
It also has its own ecosystem, its own sense of predator and prey.
Every single object you see here is simulated in some way.
This is a game being built by one of the biggest companies in the world, NetEase, a huge Chinese company.
And they've made an assistant creative simulation where groups of players can cocreate together, across multiple devices, in a world that doesn't vanish when you're done.
It's a place to tell stories and have adventures.
Even the weather is simulated.
And that's kind of awesome.
And this is my personal favorite.
This is a group of people, pioneers in Berlin, a group called Klang Games, and they're completely insane, and they'll love me for saying that.
And they found a way to model, basically, an entire planet.
They're going to have a simulation with millions of non-player characters and players engaging.
They actually grabbed Lawrence Lessig to help understand the political ramifications of the world they're creating.
This is the sort of astounding set of experiences, well beyond what we might have imagined, that are now going to be possible.
So if we step beyond that, what happens?
Well, computer science tends to be all exponential, once we crack the really hard problems.
And I'm pretty sure that very soon, we're going to be in a place where we can make this type of computational power look like nothing.
And when that happens, the opportunities ...
It's worth taking a moment to try to imagine what I'm talking about here.
Hundreds of thousands or millions of people being able to coinhabit the same space.
The last time any of us as a species had the opportunity to build or do something together with that may people was in antiquity.
And the circumstances were less than optimal, shall we say.
Mostly conflicts or building pyramids.
Not necessarily the best thing for us to be spending our time doing.
But if you bring together that many people, the kind of shared experience that can create ...
I think it exercises a social muscle in us that we've lost and forgotten.
Going even beyond that, I want to take a moment to think about what it means for relationships, for identity.
If we can give each other worlds, experiences at scale where we can spend a meaningful amount of our time, we can change what it means to be an individual.
We can go beyond a single identity to a diverse set of personal identities.
The gender, the race, the personality traits you were born with might be something you want to experiment differently with.
You might be someone that wants to be more than one person.
We all are, inside, multiple people.
We rarely get the opportunity to flex that.
It's also about empathy.
I have a grandmother who I have literally nothing in common with.
I love her to bits, but every story she has begins in 1940 and ends sometime in 1950.
And every story I have is like 50 years later.
But if we could coinhabit, co-experience things together, that undiminished by physical frailty or by lack of context, create opportunities together, that changes things, that bonds people in different ways.
I'm struck by how social media has amplified our many differences, and really made us more who we are in the presence of other people.
I think games could really start to create an opportunity for us to empathize again.
To have shared adversity, shared opportunity.
I mean, statistically, at this moment in time, there are people who are on the opposite sides of a conflict, who have been matchmade together into a game and don't even know it.
That's an incredible opportunity to change the way we look at things.
Finally, for those of you who perhaps are more cynical about all of this, who maybe don't think that virtual worlds and games are your cup of tea.
There's a reality you have to accept, and that is that the economic impact of what I'm talking about will be profound.
Soon, it will be millions of people.
Wherever there's a mobile phone, there will be a job.
An opportunity for something that is creative and rich and gives you an income, no matter what country you're in, no matter what skills or opportunities you might think you have.
Probably the first dollar most kids born today make might be in a game.
That will be the new paper route, that will be the new opportunity for an income at the earliest time in your life.
So I kind of want to end with almost a plea, really, more than thoughts.
A sense of, I think, how we need to face this new opportunity a little differently to some we have in the past.
It's so hypocritical for yet another technologist to stand up on stage and say, "The future will be great, technology will fix it."
And the reality is, this is going to have downsides.
But those downsides will only be amplified if we approach, once again, with cynicism and derision, the opportunities that this presents.
The worst thing that we could possibly do is let the same four or five companies end up dominating yet another adjacent space.
(Applause) Because they're not just going to define how and who makes money from this.
The reality is, we're now talking about defining how we think, what the rules are around identity and collaboration, the rules of the world we live in.
This has got to be something we all own, we all cocreate.
So, my final plea is really to those engineers, those scientists, those artists in the audience today.
Maybe some of you dreamed of working on space travel.
The reality is, there are worlds you can build right here, right now, that can transform people's lives.
There are still huge technological frontiers that need to be overcome here, akin to those we faced when building the early internet.
All the technology behind virtual worlds is different.
So, my plea to you is this.
Let's engage, let's all engage, let's actually try to make this something that we shape in a positive way, rather than once again have be done to us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The royal couple of Haiti rode into their coronation to thunderous applause.
After receiving his ornate crown and scepter, Henry Christophe ascended his throne, towering 20 meters in the air.
But little did the cheering onlookers know that the first king of Haiti would also be its last.
Enslaved at birth on the island of Grenada, Christophe spent his childhood being moved between multiple Caribbean islands.
Just 12 years old in 1779, he accompanied his master to aid the American revolutionaries in the Battle of Savannah.
This prolonged siege would be Christophes first encounter with violent revolution.
There are few surviving written records about Christophes life immediately after the war.
Over the next decade, we know he worked as a mason and a waiter at a hotel in the French colony of Saint-Domingue, as Haiti was then known.
In 1791, when the colonys slaves rose up in rebellion, Christophe got another opportunity to fight for freedom.
Led by Toussaint Louverture, the rebels fought against plantation owners, as well as British and Spanish forces seeking control of the island.
Christophe quickly rose through the ranks, proving himself the equal of more experienced generals.
By 1793, Louverture had successfully liberated all of Saint-Domingues enslaved people, and by 1801 hed established the island as a semi-autonomous colony.
But during this time, Napoleon Bonaparte had assumed power in France, and made it his mission to restore slavery and French authority throughout the empire.
French attempts to reinstate slavery met fierce resistance, with General Christophe even burning the capital city to prevent military occupation.
Finally, the rebellion and an outbreak of yellow fever forced French soldiers to withdraw but the fight was not without casualties.
Louverture was captured, and left to die in a French prison; a fate that Christophes nine-year-old son would share only a few years later.
Following the revolution, Christophe and generals Jean-Jacques Dessalines and Alexandre Ption rose to prominent positions in the new government.
In 1804, Dessalines was proclaimed the emperor of independent Haiti.
But his desire to hold exclusive power alienated his supporters.
Eventually, Dessalines rule incited a political conspiracy that ended in his assassination in 1806.
The subsequent power struggle led to a Civil War, which split the country in two.
By 1807, Christophe was governing as president of the north in Cap-Hatien, and Ption was ruling the south from Port-au-Prince.
Ption tried to stay true to the revolutions democratic roots by modeling his republic after the United States.
He even supported anti-colonial revolutionaries in other nations.
These policies endeared him to his people, but they slowed trade and economic growth.
Christophe, conversely, had more aggressive plans for an independent Haiti.
He redistributed land to the people, while retaining state control of agriculture.
He also established trade with many foreign nations, including Great Britain and the United States, and pledged non-interference with their foreign policies.
He even built a massive Citadel in case the French tried to invade again.
To accomplish all of this, Christophe instituted mandatory labor, and to strengthen his authority, he crowned himself king in 1811.
During his reign, he lived in an elegant palace called Sans Souci along with his wife and their three remaining children.
Christophes kingdom oversaw rapid development of trade, industry, culture, and education.
He imported renowned European artists to Haitis cultural scene, as well as European teachers, in order to establish public education.
But while the king was initially popular among his subjects, his labor mandates were an uncomfortable reminder of the slavery Haitians fought to destroy.
Over time, his increasingly authoritarian policies lost support, and his opponents to the south gained strength.
In October 1820, his reign finally reached its tragic conclusion.
Months after a debilitating stroke left him unable to govern, key members of his military defected to southern forces.
Betrayed and despondent, the king committed suicide.
Today, the traces of Christophes complicated history can still be found in the crumbling remains of his palaces, and in Haitis legacy as the first nation to permanently abolish slavery.
I coined my own definition of success in 1934, when I was teaching at a high school in South Bend, Indiana, being a little bit disappointed, and [disillusioned] perhaps, by the way parents of the youngsters in my English classes expected their youngsters to get an A or a B.
They thought a C was all right for the neighbors' children, because they were all average.
But they weren't satisfied when their own -- it would make the teacher feel that they had failed, or the youngster had failed.
And that's not right.
The good Lord in his infinite wisdom didn't create us all equal as far as intelligence is concerned, any more than we're equal for size, appearance.
Not everybody could earn an A or a B, and I didn't like that way of judging, and I did know how the alumni of various schools back in the '30s judged coaches and athletic teams.
If you won them all, you were considered to be reasonably successful -- not completely.
Because I found out -- we had a number of years at UCLA where we didn't lose a game.
But it seemed that we didn't win each individual game by the margin that some of our alumni had predicted -- (Laughter) And quite frequently I really felt that they had backed up their predictions in a more materialistic manner.
(Laughter) But that was true back in the 30s, so I understood that.
But I didn't like it, I didn't agree with it.
I wanted to come up with something I hoped could make me a better teacher, and give the youngsters under my supervision, be it in athletics or the English classroom, something to which to aspire, other than just a higher mark in the classroom, or more points in some athletic contest.
I thought about that for quite a spell, and I wanted to come up with my own definition.
And I knew how Mr. Webster defined it, as the accumulation of material possessions or the attainment of a position of power or prestige, or something of that sort, worthy accomplishments perhaps, but in my opinion, not necessarily indicative of success.
So I wanted to come up with something of my own.
And I recalled -- I was raised on a small farm in Southern Indiana, and Dad tried to teach me and my brothers that you should never try to be better than someone else.
I'm sure at the time he did that, I didn't -- it didn't -- well, somewhere, I guess in the hidden recesses of the mind, it popped out years later.
Never try to be better than someone else, always learn from others.
Never cease trying to be the best you can be -- that's under your control.
If you get too engrossed and involved and concerned in regard to the things over which you have no control, it will adversely affect the things over which you have control.
Then I ran across this simple verse that said, "At God's footstool to confess, a poor soul knelt, and bowed his head.
'I failed!' he cried.
The Master said, 'Thou didst thy best, that is success.'" From those things, and one other perhaps, I coined my own definition of success, which is: Peace of mind attained only through self-satisfaction in knowing you made the effort to do the best of which you're capable.
I believe that's true.
If you make the effort to do the best of which you're capable, trying to improve the situation that exists for you, I think that's success, and I don't think others can judge that; it's like character and reputation -- your reputation is what you're perceived to be; your character is what you really are.
And I think that character is much more important than what you are perceived to be.
You'd hope they'd both be good, but they won't necessarily be the same.
Well, that was my idea that I was going to try to get across to the youngsters.
I ran across other things.
I love to teach, and it was mentioned by the previous speaker that I enjoy poetry, and I dabble in it a bit, and love it.
There are some things that helped me, I think, be better than I would have been.
I know I'm not what I ought to be, what I should be, but I think I'm better than I would have been if I hadn't run across certain things.
One was just a little verse that said, "No written word, no spoken plea can teach our youth what they should be; nor all the books on all the shelves -- it's what the teachers are themselves."
That made an impression on me in the 1930s.
And I tried to use that more or less in my teaching, whether it be in sports, or whether it be in the English classroom.
I love poetry and always had an interest in that somehow.
Maybe it's because Dad used to read to us at night, by coal oil lamp -- we didn't have electricity in our farm home.
And Dad would read poetry to us. So I always liked it.
And about the same time I ran across this one verse, I ran across another one.
Someone asked a lady teacher why she taught, and after some time, she said she wanted to think about that.
Then she came up and said, "They ask me why I teach, and I reply, 'Where could I find such splendid company?' There sits a statesman, strong, unbiased, wise; another Daniel Webster, silver-tongued.
A doctor sits beside him, whose quick, steady hand may mend a bone, or stem the life-blood's flow.
And there a builder; upward rise the arch of a church he builds, wherein that minister may speak the word of God, and lead a stumbling soul to touch the Christ.
And all about, a gathering of teachers, farmers, merchants, laborers -- those who work and vote and build and plan and pray into a great tomorrow.
And I may say, I may not see the church, or hear the word, or eat the food their hands may grow, but yet again I may; And later I may say, I knew him once, and he was weak, or strong, or bold or proud or gay.
I knew him once, but then he was a boy.
They ask me why I teach and I reply, 'Where could I find such splendid company?'" And I believe the teaching profession -- it's true, you have so many youngsters, and I've got to think of my youngsters at UCLA -- 30-some attorneys, 11 dentists and doctors, many, many teachers and other professions.
And that gives you a great deal of pleasure, to see them go on.
I always tried to make the youngsters feel that they're there to get an education, number one; basketball was second, because it was paying their way, and they do need a little time for social activities, but you let social activities take a little precedence over the other two, and you're not going to have any very long.
So that was the idea that I tried to get across to the youngsters under my supervision.
I had three rules, pretty much, that I stuck with practically all the time.
I'd learned these prior to coming to UCLA, and I decided they were very important.
One was "Never be late."
Later on I said certain things -- the players, if we were leaving for somewhere, had to be neat and clean.
There was a time when I made them wear jackets and shirts and ties.
Then I saw our chancellor coming to school in denims and turtlenecks, and thought, it's not right for me to keep this other [rule] so I let them just -- they had to be neat and clean.
I had one of my greatest players that you probably heard of, Bill Walton.
He came to catch the bus; we were leaving for somewhere to play.
And he wasn't clean and neat, so I wouldn't let him go.
He couldn't get on the bus, he had to go home and get cleaned up to get to the airport.
So I was a stickler for that. I believed in that.
I believe in time; very important.
I believe you should be on time, but I felt at practice, for example -- we start on time, we close on time.
The youngsters didn't have to feel that we were going to keep them over.
When I speak at coaching clinics, I often tell young coaches -- and at coaching clinics, more or less, they'll be the younger coaches getting in the profession.
Most of them are young, you know, and probably newly-married.
And I tell them, "Don't run practices late, because you'll go home in a bad mood, and that's not good, for a young married man to go home in a bad mood.
When you get older, it doesn't make any difference, but --" (Laughter) So I did believe: on time.
I believe starting on time, and I believe closing on time.
And another one I had was, not one word of profanity.
One word of profanity, and you are out of here for the day.
If I see it in a game, you're going to come out and sit on the bench.
And the third one was, never criticize a teammate.
I didn't want that. I used to tell them I was paid to do that.
That's my job. I'm paid to do it. Pitifully poor, but I am paid to do it.
Not like the coaches today, for gracious sakes, no.
It's a little different than it was in my day.
Those were three things that I stuck with pretty closely all the time.
And those actually came from my dad.
That's what he tried to teach me and my brothers at one time.
I came up with a pyramid eventually, that I don't have the time to go on that.
It's something like this: And I had blocks in the pyramid, and the cornerstones being industriousness and enthusiasm, working hard and enjoying what you're doing, coming up to the apex, according to my definition of success.
And right at the top, faith and patience.
And I say to you, in whatever you're doing, you must be patient.
You have to have patience to -- we want things to happen.
They want to change everything. They think all change is progress.
And we get a little older -- we sort of let things go.
And we forget there is no progress without change.
So you must have patience, and I believe that we must have faith.
I believe that we must believe, truly believe.
Not just give it word service, believe that things will work out as they should, providing we do what we should.
I think our tendency is to hope things will turn out the way we want them to much of the time, but we don't do the things that are necessary to make those things become reality.
I worked on this for some 14 years, and I think it helped me become a better teacher.
But it all revolved around that original definition of success.
You know, a number of years ago, there was a Major League Baseball umpire by the name of George Moriarty.
He spelled Moriarty with only one 'i'.
I'd never seen that before, but he did.
Big league baseball players -- they're very perceptive about those things, and they noticed he had only one 'i' in his name.
You'd be surprised how many also told him that that was one more than he had in his head at various times.
(Laughter) But he wrote something where I think he did what I tried to do in this pyramid.
He called it "The Road Ahead, or the Road Behind."
He said, "Sometimes I think the Fates must grin as we denounce them and insist the only reason we can't win, is the Fates themselves have missed.
Yet there lives on the ancient claim: we win or lose within ourselves.
The shining trophies on our shelves can never win tomorrow's game.
You and I know deeper down, there's always a chance to win the crown.
But when we fail to give our best, we simply haven't met the test, of giving all and saving none until the game is really won; of showing what is meant by grit; of playing through when others quit; of playing through, not letting up.
It's bearing down that wins the cup.
Of dreaming there's a goal ahead; of hoping when our dreams are dead; of praying when our hopes have fled; yet losing, not afraid to fall, if, bravely, we have given all.
For who can ask more of a man than giving all within his span.
Giving all, it seems to me, is not so far from victory.
And so the Fates are seldom wrong, no matter how they twist and wind.
It's you and I who make our fates -- we open up or close the gates on the road ahead or the road behind."
Reminds me of another set of threes that my dad tried to get across to us: Don't whine. Don't complain. Don't make excuses.
Just get out there, and whatever you're doing, do it to the best of your ability.
And no one can do more than that.
I tried to get across, too, that -- my opponents will tell you -- you never heard me mention winning.
Never mention winning.
My idea is that you can lose when you outscore somebody in a game, and you can win when you're outscored.
I've felt that way on certain occasions, at various times.
And I just wanted them to be able to hold their head up after a game.
I used to say that when a game is over, and you see somebody that didn't know the outcome, I hope they couldn't tell by your actions whether you outscored an opponent or the opponent outscored you.
That's what really matters: if you make an effort to do the best you can regularly, the results will be about what they should be.
Not necessarily what you'd want them to be but they'll be about what they should; only you will know whether you can do that.
And that's what I wanted from them more than anything else.
And as time went by, and I learned more about other things, I think it worked a little better, as far as the results.
But I wanted the score of a game to be the byproduct of these other things, and not the end itself.
I believe it was one great philosopher who said -- no, no -- Cervantes.
Cervantes said, "The journey is better than the end."
And I like that.
I think that it is -- it's getting there.
But it's the getting there that's the fun.
As a basketball coach at UCLA, I liked our practices to be the journey, and the game would be the end, the end result.
I liked to go up and sit in the stands and watch the players play, and see whether I'd done a decent job during the week.
There again, it's getting the players to get that self-satisfaction, in knowing that they'd made the effort to do the best of which they are capable.
Sometimes I'm asked who was the best player I had, or the best teams.
I can never answer that.
As far as the individuals are concerned -- I was asked one time about that, and they said, "Suppose that you, in some way, could make the perfect player.
What would you want?"
And I said, "Well, I'd want one that knew why he was at UCLA: to get an education, he was a good student, really knew why he was there in the first place.
But I'd want one that could play, too.
I'd want one to realize that defense usually wins championships, and who would work hard on defense.
But I'd want one who would play offense, too.
I'd want him to be unselfish, and look for the pass first and not shoot all the time.
And I'd want one that could pass and would pass.
(Laughter) I've had some that could and wouldn't, and I've had some that would and could.
And I wanted them to be able to shoot from the outside.
I wanted them to be good inside too.
(Laughter) I'd want them to be able to rebound well at both ends, too.
Why not just take someone like Keith Wilkes and let it go at that.
He had the qualifications.
Not the only one, but he was one that I used in that particular category, because I think he made the effort to become the best.
I mention in my book, "They Call Me Coach," two players that gave me great satisfaction, that came as close as I think anyone I ever had to reach their full potential: one was Conrad Burke, and one was Doug McIntosh.
When I saw them as freshmen, on our freshmen team -- freshmen couldn't play varsity when I taught.
I thought, "Oh gracious, if these two players, either one of them" -- they were different years, but I thought about each one at the time he was there -- "Oh, if he ever makes the varsity, our varsity must be pretty miserable, if he's good enough to make it."
And you know, one of them was a starting player for a season and a half.
The other one, his next year, played 32 minutes in a national championship game, Did a tremendous job for us.
The next year, he was a starting player on the national championship team, and here I thought he'd never play a minute, when he was -- so those are the things that give you great joy, and great satisfaction to see.
Neither one of those youngsters could shoot very well.
But they had outstanding shooting percentages, because they didn't force it.
And neither one could jump very well, but they kept good position, and so they did well rebounding.
They remembered that every shot that's taken, they assumed would be missed.
I've had too many stand around and wait to see if it's missed, then they go and it's too late, somebody else is in there ahead of them.
They weren't very quick, but they played good position, kept in good balance.
And so they played pretty good defense for us.
So they had qualities that -- they came close to -- as close to reaching possibly their full potential as any players I ever had.
So I consider them to be as successful as Lewis Alcindor or Bill Walton, or many of the others that we had; there were some outstanding players.
Have I rambled enough?
I was told that when he makes his appearance, I was supposed to shut up.
(Laughter) (Applause)
When most people think about the beginnings of AIDS, they're gonna think back to the 1980s.
And certainly, this was the decade in which we discovered AIDS and the virus that causes it, HIV.
But in fact this virus crossed over into humans many decades before, from chimpanzees, where the virus originated, into humans who hunt these apes.
This photo was taken before the Great Depression in Brazzaville, Congo.
At this time, there were thousands of individuals, we think, that were infected with HIV.
So I have a couple of really important questions for you.
If this virus was in thousands of individuals at this point, why was it the case that it took us until 1984 to be able to discover this virus?
OK now, more importantly, had we been there in the '40s and '50s, '60s, had we seen this disease, had we understood exactly what was going on with it, how might that have changed and completely transformed the nature of the way this pandemic moved?
In fact, this is not unique to HIV. The vast majority of viruses come from animals.
And you can kind of think of this as a pyramid of this bubbling up of viruses from animals into human populations.
But only at the very top of this pyramid do these things become completely human.
Nevertheless, we spend the vast majority of our energy focused on this level of the pyramid, trying to tackle things that are already completely adapted to human beings, that are going to be very very difficult to address -- as we've seen in the case of HIV.
So during the last 15 years, I've been working to actually study the earlier interface here -- what I've labeled "viral chatter," which was a term coined by my mentor Don Burke.
This is the idea that we can study the sort of pinging of these viruses into human populations, the movement of these agents over into humans; and by capturing this moment, we might be able to move to a situation where we can catch them early.
OK, so this is a picture, and I'm going to show you some pictures now from the field.
This is a picture of a central African hunter.
It's actually a fairly common picture.
One of the things I want you to note from it is blood -- that you see a tremendous amount of blood contact.
This was absolutely key for us. This is a very intimate form of connection.
So if we're going to study viral chatter, we need to get to these populations who have intensive contact with wild animals.
And so we've been studying people like this individual.
We collect blood from them, other specimens.
We look at the diseases, which are in the animals as well as the humans.
And ideally, this is going to allow us to catch these things early on, as they're moving over into human populations.
And the basic objective of this work is not to just go out once and look at these individuals, but to establish thousands of individuals in these populations that we would monitor continuously on a regular basis.
When they were sick, we would collect specimens from them.
We would actually enlist them -- which we've done now -- to collect specimens from animals.
We give them these little pieces of filter paper.
When they sample from animals, they collect the blood on the filter paper and this allows us to identify yet-unknown viruses from exactly the right animals -- the ones that are actually being hunted.
(Video) Narrator: Deep in a remote region of Cameroon, two hunters stalk their prey.
Their names are Patrice and Patee.
They're searching for bush meat; forest animals they can kill to feed their families.
Patrice and Patee set out most days to go out hunting in the forest around their homes.
They have a series of traps, of snares that they've set up to catch wild pigs, snakes, monkeys, rodents -- anything they can, really.
Patrice and Patee have been out for hours but found nothing.
The animals are simply gone.
We stop for a drink of water.
Then there is a rustle in the brush.
A group of hunters approach, their packs loaded with wild game.
There's at least three viruses that you know about, which are in this particular monkey.
Nathan Wolfe: This species, yeah. And there's many many more pathogens that are present in these animals.
These individuals are at specific risk, particularly if there's blood contact, they're at risk for transmission and possibly infection with novel viruses.
Narrator: As the hunters display their kills, something surprising happens.
They show us filter paper they've used to collect the animals' blood.
The blood will be tested for zoonotic viruses, part of a program Dr. Wolfe has spent years setting up.
NW: So this is from this animal right here, Greater Spot-Nosed Guenon.
Every person who has one of those filter papers has at least, at a minimum, been through our basic health education about the risks associated with these activities, which presumably, from our perspective, gives them the ability to decrease their own risk, and then obviously the risk to their families, the village, the country, and the world.
NW: OK, before I continue, I think it's important to take just a moment to talk about bush meat. Bush meat is the hunting of wild game.
OK? And you can consider all sorts of different bush meat.
I'm going to be talking about this.
When your children and grandchildren sort of pose questions to you about this period of time, one of the things they're gonna ask you, is how it was they we allowed some of our closest living relatives, some of the most valuable and endangered species on our planet, to go extinct because we weren't able to address some of the issues of poverty in these parts of the world.
But in fact that's not the only question they're going to ask you about this.
They're also going to ask you the question that when we knew that this was the way that HIV entered into the human population, and that other diseases had the potential to enter like this, why did we let these behaviors continue?
Why did we not find some other solution to this?
They're going to say, in regions of profound instability throughout the world, where you have intense poverty, where populations are growing and you don't have sustainable resources like this, this is going to lead to food insecurity.
But they're also going to ask you probably a different question.
It's one that I think we all need to ask ourselves, which is, why we thought the responsibility rested with this individual here.
Now this is the individual -- you can see just right up over his right shoulder -- this is the individual that hunted the monkey from the last picture that I showed you.
OK, take a look at his shirt.
You know, take a look at his face.
Bush meat is one of the central crises, which is occurring in our population right now, in humanity, on this planet.
But it can't be the fault of somebody like this.
OK? And solving it cannot be his responsibility alone.
There's no easy solutions, but what I'm saying to you is that we neglect this problem at our own peril.
So, in 1998, along with my mentors Don Burke and Colonel Mpoudi-Ngole, we went to actually start this work in Central Africa, to work with hunters in this part of the world.
And my job -- at that time I was a post-doctoral fellow, and I was really tasked with setting this up.
So I said to myself, "OK, great -- we're gonna collect all kinds of specimens. We're gonna go to all these different locations. It's going to be wonderful."
You know, I looked at the map; I picked out 17 sites; I figured, no problem.
(Laughter) Needless to say, I was drastically wrong.
This is challenging work to do.
Fortunately, I had and continue to have an absolutely wonderful team of colleagues and collaborators in my own team, and that's the only way that this work can really occur.
We have a whole range of challenges about this work.
One of them is just obtaining trust from individuals that we work with in the field.
The person you see on the right hand side is Paul DeLong-Minutu.
He's one of the best communicators that I've really ever dealt with.
When I arrived I didn't speak a word of French, and I still seemed to understand what it was he was saying.
Paul worked for years on the Cameroonian national radio and television, and he spoke about health issues. He was a health correspondent.
So we figured we'd hire this person -- when we got there he could be a great communicator.
When we would get to these rural villages, though, what we found out is that no one had television, so they wouldn't recognize his face.
But -- when he began to speak they would actually recognize his voice from the radio.
And this was somebody who had incredible potential to spread aspects of our message, whether it be with regards to wildlife conservation or health prevention.
Often we run into obstacles. This is us coming back from one of these very rural sites, with specimens from 200 individuals that we needed to get back to the lab within 48 hours.
I like to show this shot -- this is Ubald Tamoufe, who's the lead investigator in our Cameroon site.
Ubald laughs at me when I show this photo because of course you can't see his face.
But the reason I like to show the shot is because you can see that he's about to solve this problem.
(Laughter) Which -- which he did, which he did.
Just a few quick before and after shots.
This was our laboratory before.
This is what it looks like now.
Early on, in order to ship our specimens, we had to have dry ice. To get dry ice we had to go to the breweries -- beg, borrow, steal to get these folks to give it to us.
Now we have our own liquid nitrogen.
I like to call our laboratory the coldest place in Central Africa -- it might be.
And here's a shot of me, this is the before shot of me.
(Laughter) No comment.
So what happened? So during the 10 years that we've been doing this work, we actually surprised ourselves.
We made a number of discoveries.
And what we've found is that if you look in the right place, you can actually monitor the flow of these viruses into human populations.
That gave us a tremendous amount of hope.
What we've found is a whole range of new viruses in these individuals, including new viruses in the same group as HIV -- so, brand new retroviruses.
And let's face it, any new retrovirus in the human population -- it's something we should be aware of.
It's something we should be following. It's not something that we should be surprised by.
Needless to say in the past these viruses entering into these rural communities might very well have gone extinct.
That's no longer the case. Logging roads provide access to urban areas.
And critically, what happens in central Africa doesn't stay in Central Africa.
So, once we discovered that it was really possible that we could actually do this monitoring, we decided to move this from research, to really attempt to phase up to a global monitoring effort.
Through generous support and partnership scientifically with Google.org and the Skoll Foundation, we were able to start the Global Viral Forecasting Initiative and begin work in four different sites in Africa and Asia.
Needless to say, different populations from different parts of the world have different sorts of contact.
So it's not just hunters in Central Africa.
It's also working in live animal markets -- these wet markets -- which is exactly the place where SARS emerged in Asia.
But really, this is just the beginning from our perspective.
Our objective right now, in addition to deploying to these sites and getting everything moving, is to identify new partners because we feel like this effort needs to be extended to probably 20 or more sites throughout the world -- to viral hotspots -- because really the idea here is to cast an incredibly wide net so that we can catch these things, ideally, before they make it to blood banks, sexual networks, airplanes. And that's really our objective.
There was a time not very long ago when the discovery of unknown organisms was something that held incredible awe for us.
It had potential to really change the way that we saw ourselves, and thought about ourselves.
Many people, I think, on our planet right now despair, and they think we've reached a point where we've discovered most of the things.
I'm going tell you right now: please don't despair.
If an intelligent extra-terrestrial was taxed with writing the encyclopedia of life on our planet, 27 out of 30 of these volumes would be devoted to bacteria and virus, with just a few of the volumes left for plants, fungus and animals, humans being a footnote; interesting footnote but a footnote nonetheless.
This is honestly the most exciting period ever for the study of unknown life forms on our planet.
The dominant things that exist here we know almost nothing about.
And yet finally, we have the tools, which will allow us to actually explore that world and understand them.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
There are currently hundreds of thousands of people on transplant lists, waiting for critical organs like kidneys, hearts, and livers that could save their lives.
Unfortunately, there arent nearly enough donor organs available to fill that demand.
What if instead of waiting, we could create brand-new, customized organs from scratch?
Thats the idea behind bioprinting, a branch of regenerative medicine currently under development.
Were not able to print complex organs just yet, but simpler tissues including blood vessels and tubes responsible for nutrient and waste exchange are already in our grasp.
Bioprinting is a biological cousin of 3-D printing, a technique that deposits layers of material on top of each other to construct a three-dimensional object one slice at a time.
Instead of starting with metal, plastic, or ceramic, a 3-D printer for organs and tissues uses bioink: a printable material that contains living cells.
The bulk of many bioinks are water-rich molecules called hydrogels.
Mixed into those are millions of living cells as well as various chemicals that encourage cells to communicate and grow.
Some bioinks include a single type of cell, while others combine several different kinds to produce more complex structures.
Lets say you want to print a meniscus, which is a piece of cartilage in the knee that keeps the shinbone and thighbone from grinding against each other.
Its made up of cells called chondrocytes, and youll need a healthy supply of them for your bioink.
These cells can come from donors whose cell lines are replicated in a lab.
Or they might originate from a patients own tissue to create a personalized meniscus less likely to be rejected by their body.
There are several printing techniques, and the most popular is extrusion-based bioprinting.
In this, bioink gets loaded into a printing chamber and pushed through a round nozzle attached to a printhead.
It emerges from a nozzle thats rarely wider than 400 microns in diameter, and can produce a continuous filament roughly the thickness of a human fingernail.
A computerized image or file guides the placement of the strands, either onto a flat surface or into a liquid bath thatll help hold the structure in place until it stabilizes.
These printers are fast, producing the meniscus in about half an hour, one thin strand at a time.
After printing, some bioinks will stiffen immediately; others need UV light or an additional chemical or physical process to stabilize the structure.
If the printing process is successful, the cells in the synthetic tissue will begin to behave the same way cells do in real tissue: signaling to each other, exchanging nutrients, and multiplying.
We can already print relatively simple structures like this meniscus.
Bioprinted bladders have also been successfully implanted, and printed tissue has promoted facial nerve regeneration in rats.
Researchers have created lung tissue, skin, and cartilage, as well as miniature, semi-functional versions of kidneys, livers, and hearts.
However, replicating the complex biochemical environment of a major organ is a steep challenge.
Extrusion-based bioprinting may destroy a significant percentage of cells in the ink if the nozzle is too small, or if the printing pressure is too high.
One of the most formidable challenges is how to supply oxygen and nutrients to all the cells in a full-size organ.
Thats why the greatest successes so far have been with structures that are flat or hollow and why researchers are busy developing ways to incorporate blood vessels into bioprinted tissue.
Theres tremendous potential to use bioprinting to save lives and advance our understanding of how our organs function in the first place.
And the technology opens up a dizzying array of possibilities, such as printing tissues with embedded electronics.
Could we one day engineer organs that exceed current human capability, or give ourselves features like unburnable skin?
How long might we extend human life by printing and replacing our organs?
And exactly whoand what will have access to this technology and its incredible output?
What I want to talk about is, as background, is the idea that cars are art.
This is actually quite meaningful to me, because car designers tend to be a little bit low on the totem pole -- we don't do coffee table books with just one lamp inside of it -- and cars are thought so much as a product that it's a little bit difficult to get into the aesthetic side under the same sort of terminology that one would discuss art.
And so cars, as art, brings it into an emotional plane -- if you accept that -- that you have to deal with on the same level you would with art with a capital A.
Now at this point you're going to see a picture of Michelangelo.
This is completely different than automobiles.
Automobiles are self-moving things, right? Elevators are automobiles.
And they're not very emotional; they solve a purpose; and certainly automobiles have been around for 100 years and have made our lives functionally a lot better in many ways; they've also been a real pain in the ass, because automobiles are really the thing we have to solve.
We have to solve the pollution, we have to solve the congestion -- but that's not what interests me in this speech.
What interests me in this speech is cars. Automobiles may be what you use, but cars are what we are, in many ways.
And as long as we can solve the problems of automobiles, and I believe we can, with fuel cells or hydrogen, like BMW is really hip on, and lots of other things, then I think we can look past that and try and understand why this hook is in many of us -- of this car-y-ness -- and what that means, what we can learn from it.
That's what I want to get to. Cars are not a suit of clothes; cars are an avatar. Cars are an expansion of yourself: they take your thoughts, your ideas, your emotions, and they multiply it -- your anger, whatever. It's an avatar.
It's a super-waldo that you happen to be inside of, and if you feel sexy, the car is sexy. And if you're full of road rage, you've got a "Chevy: Like a Rock," right?
Cars are a sculpture -- did you know this?
That every car you see out there is sculpted by hand.
Many people think, "Well, it's computers, and it's done by machines and stuff like that."
Well, they reproduce it, but the originals are all done by hand.
It's done by men and women who believe a lot in their craft.
And they put that same kind of tension into the sculpting of a car that you do in a great sculpture that you would go and look at in a museum.
That tension between the need to express, the need to discover, then you put something new into it, and at the same time you have bounds of craftsmanship.
Rules that say, this is how you handle surfaces; this is what control is all about; this is how you show you're a master of your craft.
And that tension, that discovery, that push for something new -- and at the same time, that sense of obligation to the regards of craftsmanship -- that's as strong in cars as it is in anything.
We work in clay, which hasn't changed much since Michelangelo started screwing around with it, and there's a very interesting analogy to that too.
Real quickly -- Michelangelo once said he's there to "discover the figure within," OK?
There we go, the automobile.
That was 100 years right there -- did you catch that?
Between that one there, and that one there, it changed a lot didn't it?
OK, it's not marketing; there's a very interesting car concept here, but the marketing part is not what I want to talk about here.
I want to talk about this.
Why it means you have to wash a car, what is it, that sensuality you have to touch about it? That's the sculpture that goes into it. That sensuality.
And it's done by men and women working just like this, making cars.
Now this little quote about sculpture from Henry Moore, I believe that that "pressure within" that Moore's talking about -- at least when it comes to cars -- comes right back to this idea of the mean.
It's that will to live, that need to survive, to express itself, that comes in a car, and takes over people like me.
And we tell other people, "Do this, do this, do this," until this thing comes alive.
We are completely infected. And beauty can be the result of this infectiousness; it's quite wonderful.
This sculpture is, of course, at the heart of all of it, and it's really what puts the craftsmanship into our cars.
And it's not a whole lot different, really, when they're working like this, or when somebody works like this.
It's that same kind of commitment, that same kind of beauty.
Now, now I get to the point. I want to talk about cars as art.
Art, in the Platonic sense, is truth; it's beauty, and love.
Now this is really where designers in car business diverge from the engineers.
We don't really have a problem talking about love.
We don't have a problem talking about truth or beauty in that sense.
That's what we're searching for -- when we're working our craft, we are really trying to find that truth out there.
We're not trying to find vanity and beauty.
We're trying to find the beauty in the truth.
However, engineers tend to look at things a little bit more Newtonian, instead of this quantum approach.
We're dealing with irrationalisms, and we're dealing with paradoxes that we admit exist, and the engineers tend to look things a little bit more like two and two is four, and if you get 4.0 it's better, and 4.000 is even better.
And that sometimes leads to bit of a divergence in why we're doing what we're doing.
We've pretty much accepted the fact, though, that we are the women in the organization at BMW -- BMW is a very manly type business, -- men, men, men; it's engineers.
And we're kind of the female side to that. That's OK, that's cool. You go off and be manly. We're going to be a little bit more female.
Because what we're interested in is finding form that's more than just a function.
We're interested in finding beauty that's more than just an aesthetic; it's really a truth.
And I think this idea of soul, as being at the heart of great cars, is very applicable. You all know it. You know a car when you've seen it, with soul. You know how strong this is.
Well, this experience of love, and the experience of design, to me, are interchangeable. And now I'm coming to my story.
I discovered something about love and design through a project called Deep Blue.
And first of all, you have to go with me for a second, and say, you know, you could take the word "love" out of a lot of things in our society, put the word "design" in, and it still works, like this quote here, you know. It kind of works, you know?
You can understand that. It works in truisms.
"All is fair in design and war."
Certainly we live in a competitive society.
I think this one here, there's a pop song that really describes Philippe Starck for me, you know, this is like you know, this is like puppy love, you know, this is cool right?
Toothbrush, cool.
It really only gets serious when you look at something like this. OK?
(Laughter) This is one substitution that I believe all of us, in design management, are guilty of.
And this idea that there is more to love, more to design, when it gets down to your neighbor, your other, it can be physical like this, and maybe in the future it will be.
But right now it's in dealing with our own people, our own teams who are doing the creating. So, to my story.
The idea of people-work is what we work with here, and I have to make a bond with my designers when we're creating BMWs.
We have to have a shared intimacy, a shared vision -- that means we have to work as one family; we have to understand ourselves that way.
There's good times; there's interesting times; and there's some stress times too.
You want to do cars, you've got to go outside.
You've got to do cars in the rain; you've got to do cars in the snow.
That's, by the way, is a presentation we made to our board of directors.
We haul their butts out in the snow, too. You want to know cars outside?
Well, you've got to stand outside to do this.
And because these are artists, they have very artistic temperaments.
All right? Now one thing about art is, art is discovery, and art is discovering yourself through your art. Right?
And one thing about cars is we're all a little bit like Pygmalion, we are completely in love with our own creations.
This is one of my favorite paintings, it really describes our relationship with cars.
This is sick beyond belief.
(Laughter) But because of this, the intimacy with which we work together as a team takes on a new dimension, a new meaning.
We have a shared center; we have a shared focus -- that car stays at the middle of all our relationships.
And it's my job, in the competitive process, to narrow this down.
I heard today about Joseph's death genes that have to go in and kill cell reproduction.
You know, that's what I have to do sometimes.
We start out with 10 cars; we narrow it down to five cars, down to three cars, down to two cars, down to one car, and I'm in the middle of that killing, basically.
Someone's love, someone's baby.
This is very difficult, and you have to have a bond with your team that permits you to do this, because their life is wrapped up in that too.
They've got that gene infected in them as well, and they want that to live, more than anything else.
Well, this project, Deep Blue, put me in contact with my team in a way that I never expected, and I want to pass it on to you, because I want you to reflect on this, perhaps in your own relationships.
We wanted to a do a car which was a complete leap of faith for BMW.
We wanted to do a team which was so removed from the way we'd done it, that I only had a phone number that connected me to them.
So, what we did was: instead of having a staff of artists that are just your wrist, we decided to free up a team of creative designers and engineers to find out what's the successor to the SUV phenomenon in America.
This is 1996 we did this project. And so we sent them off with this team name, Deep Blue. Now many people know Deep Blue from IBM -- we actually stole it from them because we figured if anybody read our faxes they'd think we're talking about computers.
It turned out it was quite clever because Deep Blue, in a company like BMW, has a hook -- "Deep Blue," wow, cool name.
So people get wrapped up in it. And we took a team of designers, and we sent them off to America. And we gave them a budget, what we thought was a set of deliverables, a timetable, and nothing else.
Like I said, I just had a phone number that connected me to them.
And a group of engineers worked in Germany, and the idea was they would work separately on this problem of what's the successor to the SUV.
They would come together, compare notes. Then they would work apart, come together, and they would produce together a monumental set of diverse opinions that didn't pollute each other's ideas -- but at the same time came together and resolved the problems.
Hopefully, really understand the customer at its heart, where the customer is, live with them in America. So -- sent the team off, and actually something different happened. They went other places.
(Laughter) They disappeared, quite honestly, and all I got was postcards.
Now, I got some postcards of these guys in Las Vegas, and I got some postcards of these guys in the Grand Canyon, and I got these postcards of Niagara Falls, and pretty soon they're in New York, and I don't know where else.
And I'm telling myself, "This is going to be a great car, they're doing research that I've never even thought about before."
Right? And they decided that instead of, like, having a studio, and six or seven apartments, it was cheaper to rent Elizabeth Taylor's ex-house in Malibu.
And -- at least they told me it was her house, I guess it was at one time, she had a party there or something.
But anyway, this was the house, and they all lived there.
Now this is 24/7 living, half-a-dozen people who'd left their -- some had left their wives behind and families behind, and they literally lived in this house for the entire six months the project was in America, but the first three months were the most intensive.
And one of the young women in the project, she was a fantastic lady, she actually built her room in the bathroom.
The bathroom was so big, she built the bed over the bathtub -- it's quite fascinating.
On the other hand, I didn't know anything about this. OK?
Nothing. This is all going on, and all I'm getting is postcards of these guys in Las Vegas, or whatever, saying, "Don't worry Chris, this is really going to be good." OK?
So my concept of what a design studio was probably -- I wasn't up to speed on where these guys were.
However, the engineers back in Munich had taken on this kind of Newtonian solution, and they were trying to find how many cup holders can dance on the head of a pin, and, you know, these really serious questions that are confronting the modern consumer.
And one was hoping that these two teams would get together, and this collusion of incredible creativity, under these incredible surroundings, and these incredibly stressed-out engineers, would create some incredible solutions.
Well, what I didn't know was, and what we found out was -- these guys, they can't even like talk to each other under those conditions.
You get a divergence of Newtonian and quantum thinking at that point, you have a split in your dialog that is so deep, and so far, that they cannot bring this together at all.
And so we had our first meeting, after three months, in Tiburon, which is just up the road from here -- you know Tiburon?
And the idea was after the first three months of this independent research they would present it all to Dr. Goschel -- who is now my boss, and at that time he was co-mentor on the project -- and they would present their results.
We would see where we were going, we would see the first indication of what could be the successive phenomenon to the SUV in America.
And so I had these ideas in my head, that this is going to be great.
I mean, I'm going to see so much work, it's so intense -- I know probably Las Vegas meant a lot about it, and I'm not really sure where the Grand Canyon came in either -- but somehow all this is going to come together, and I'm going to see some really great product.
So we went to Tiburon, after three months, and the team had gotten together the week before, many days ahead of time.
The engineers flew over, and designers got together with them, and they put their presentation together.
Well, it turns out that the engineers hadn't done anything.
And they hadn't done anything because -- kind of, like in car business, engineers are there to solve problems, and we were asking them to create a problem.
And the engineers were waiting for the designers to say, "This is the problem that we've created, now help us solve it."
And they couldn't talk about it. So what happened was, the engineers showed up with nothing.
And the engineers told the designers, "If you go in with all your stuff, we'll walk out, we'll walk right out of the project."
So I didn't know any of this, and we got a presentation that had an agenda, looked like this.
There was a whole lot of dialog.
We spent four hours being told all about vocabulary that needs to be built between engineers and designers.
And here I'm expecting at any moment, "OK, they're going to turn the page, and I'm going to see the cars, I'm going to see the sketches, I'm going to see maybe some idea of where it's going."
Dialog kept on going, with mental maps of words, and pretty soon it was becoming obvious that instead of being dazzled with brilliance, I was seriously being baffled with bullshit.
And if you can imagine what this is like, to have these months of postcard indication of how great this team is working, and they're out there spending all this money, and they're learning, and they're doing all this stuff.
I went fucking ballistic, right? I went nuts.
You can probably remember Tiburon, it used to look like this.
After four hours of this, I stood up, and I took this team apart.
I screamed at them, I yelled at them, "What the hell are you doing?
You're letting me down, you're my designers, you're supposed to be the creative ones, what the hell is going on around here?"
It was probably one of my better tirades, I have some good ones, but this was probably one of my better ones. And I went into these people; how could they take BMW's money, how could they have a holiday for three months and produce nothing, nothing?
Because of course they didn't tell us that they had three station wagons full of drawings, model concepts, pictures -- everything I wanted, they'd locked up in the cars, because they had shown solidarity with the engineers -- and they'd decided not to show me anything, in order to give the chance for problem solving a chance to start, because they hadn't realized, of course, that they couldn't do problem creating.
So we went to lunch -- (Laughter) And I've got to tell you, this was one seriously quiet lunch.
The engineers all sat at one end of the table, the designers and I sat at the other end of the table, really quiet.
And I was just fucking furious, furious. OK?
Probably because they had all the fun and I didn't, you know.
That's what you get furious about right?
And somebody asked me about Catherine, my wife, you know, did she fly out with me or something?
I said, "No," and it triggered a set of thoughts about my wife.
And I recalled that when Catherine and I were married, the priest gave a very nice sermon, and he said something very important.
He said, "Love is not selfish," he said, "Love does not mean counting how many times I say, 'I love you.' It doesn't mean you had sex this many times this month, and it's two times less than last month, so that means you don't love me as much.
Love is not selfish." And I thought about this, and I thought, "You know, I'm not showing love here. I'm seriously not showing love.
I'm in the air, I'm in the air without trust.
This cannot be. This cannot be that I'm expecting a certain number of sketches, and to me that's my quantification method for qualifying a team.
This cannot be."
So I told them this story. I said, "Guys, I'm thinking about something here, this isn't right. I can't have a relationship with you guys based on a premise that is a quantifiable one.
Based on a dictate premise that says, 'I'm a boss, you do what I say, without trust.'" I said "This can't be."
Actually, we all broke down into tears, to be quite honest about it, because they still could not tell me how much frustration they had built up inside of them, not being able to show me what I wanted, and merely having to ask me to trust them that it would come.
And I think we felt much closer that day, we cut a lot of strings that didn't need to be there, and we forged the concept for what real team and creativity is all about.
We put the car back at the center of our thoughts, and we put love, I think, truly back into the center of the process.
By the way, that team went on to create six different concepts for the next model of what would be the proposal for the next generation after SUVs in America.
One of those was the idea of a crossover coupes -- you see it downstairs, the X Coupe -- they had a lot of fun with that.
It was the rendition of our motorcycle, the GS, as Carl Magnusson says, "brute-iful," as the idea of what could be a motorcycle, if you add two more wheels.
And so, in conclusion, my lesson that I wanted to pass on to you, was this one here. I'm also going to steal a little quote out of "Little Prince."
There's a lot to be said about trust and love, if you know that those two words are synonymous for design.
I had a very, very meaningful relationship with my team that day, and it's stayed that way ever since.
And I hope that you too find that there's more to design, and more towards the art of the design, than doing it yourself.
It's true that the trust and the love, that makes it worthwhile.
Thanks so much.
(Applause)
About 15 years ago, I went to visit a friend in Hong Kong.
And at the time I was very superstitious.
So, upon landing -- this was still at the old Hong Kong airport that's Kai Tak, when it was smack in the middle of the city -- I thought, "If I see something good, I'm going to have a great time here in my two weeks. And if I see something negative, I'm going to be miserable, indeed."
So the plane landed in between the buildings and got to a full stop in front of this little billboard.
(Laughter) And I actually went to see some of the design companies in Hong Kong in my stay there.
And it turned out that -- I just went to see, you know, what they are doing in Hong Kong.
But I actually walked away with a great job offer.
And I flew back to Austria, packed my bags, and, another week later, I was again on my way to Hong Kong still superstitions and thinking, "Well, if that 'Winner' billboard is still up, I'm going to have a good time working here.
(Laughter) But if it's gone, it's going to be really miserable and stressful."
So it turned out that not only was the billboard still up but they had put this one right next to it.
(Laughter) On the other hand, it also taught me where superstition gets me because I really had a terrible time in Hong Kong.
(Laughter) However, I did have a number of real moments of happiness in my life -- of, you know, I think what the conference brochure refers to as "moments that take your breath away."
And since I'm a big list maker, I actually listed them all.
(Laughter) Now, you don't have to go through the trouble of reading them and I won't read them for you.
I know that it's incredibly boring to hear about other people's happinesses.
(Laughter) What I did do, though is, I actually looked at them from a design standpoint and just eliminated all the ones that had nothing to do with design.
And, very surprisingly, over half of them had, actually, something to do with design.
So there are, of course, two different possibilities.
There's one from a consumer's point of view -- where I was happy while experiencing design.
And I'll just give you one example. I had gotten my first Walkman.
This is 1983.
My brother had this great Yamaha motorcycle that he was willing to borrow to me freely.
And The Police's "Synchronicity" cassette had just been released and there was no helmet law in my hometown of Bregenz.
So you could drive up into the mountains freely blasting The Police on the new Sony Walkman.
(Laughter) And I remember it as a true moment of happiness.
You know, of course, they are related to this combination of at least two of them being, you know, design objects.
And, you know, there's a scale of happiness when you talk about in design but the motorcycle incident would definitely be, you know, situated somewhere here -- right in there between Delight and Bliss.
Now, there is the other part, from a designer's standpoint -- if you're happy while actually doing it.
And one way to see how happy designers are when they're designing could be to look at the authors' photos on the back of their monographs?
(Laughter) So, according to this, the Australians and the Japanese as well as the Mexicans are very happy.
(Laughter) While, somewhat, the Spaniards ...
and, I think, particularly, the Swiss (Laughter), don't seem to be doing all that well.
(Laughter) Last November, a museum opened in Tokyo called The Mori Museum, in a skyscraper, up on the 56th floor.
And their inaugural exhibit was called "Happiness."
And I went, very eagerly, to see it, because -- well, also, with an eye on this conference.
And they interestingly sectioned the exhibit off into four different areas.
Under "Arcadia," they showed things like this, from the Edo period -- a hundred ways to write "happiness" in different forms.
Or they had this apple by Yoko Ono -- that, of course, later on was, you know, made into the label for The Beatles.
Under "Nirvana" they showed this Constable painting.
And there was a little -- an interesting theory about abstraction.
This is a blue field -- it's actually an Yves Klein painting.
And the theory was that if you abstract an image, you really, you know open as much room for the un-representable -- and, therefore, you know, are able to involve the viewer more.
Then, under "Desire," they showed these Shunsho paintings -- also from the Edo period -- ink on silk.
And, lastly, under "Harmony," they had this 13th-century mandala from Tibet.
Now, what I took away from the exhibit was that maybe with the exception of the mandala most of the pieces in there were actually about the visualization of happiness and not about happiness.
And I felt a little bit cheated, because the visualization -- that's a really easy thing to do.
And, you know, my studio -- we've done it all the time.
This is, you know, a book.
A happy dog -- and you take it out, it's an aggressive dog.
It's a happy David Byrne and an angry David Byrne.
Or a jazz poster with a happy face and a more aggressive face.
You know, that's not a big deal to accomplish.
It has gotten to the point where, you know, within advertising or within the movie industry, "happy" has gotten such a bad reputation that if you actually want to do something with the subject and still appear authentic, you almost would have to, you know, do it from a cynical point of view.
This is, you know, the movie poster.
Or we, a couple of weeks ago, designed a box set for The Talking Heads where the happiness visualized on the cover definitely has, very much, a dark side to it.
Much, much more difficult is this, where the designs actually can evoke happiness -- and I'm going to just show you three that actually did this for me.
This is a campaign done by a young artist in New York, who calls himself "True."
Everybody who has ridden the New York subway system will be familiar with these signs?
True printed his own version of these signs.
Met every Wednesday at a subway stop with 20 of his friends.
They divided up the different subway lines and added their own version.
(Laughter) So this is one.
(Laughter) Now, the way this works in the system is that nobody ever looks at these signs.
So you're (Laughter) you're really bored in the subway, and you kind of stare at something.
And it takes you a while until it actually -- you realize that this says something different than what it normally says.
(Laughter) I mean, that's, at least, how it made me happy.
(Laughter) Now, True is a real humanitarian.
He didn't want any of his friends to be arrested, so he supplied everybody with this fake volunteer card.
(Laughter) And also gave this fake letter from the MTA to everybody -- sort of like pretending that it's an art project financed by The Metropolitan Transit Authority.
(Laughter) Another New York project.
This is at P.S. 1 -- a sculpture that's basically a square room by James Turrell, that has a retractable ceiling.
Opens up at dusk and dawn every day.
You don't see the horizon.
You're just in there, watching the incredible, subtle changes of color in the sky.
And the room is truly something to be seen.
People's demeanor changes when they go in there.
And, for sure, I haven't looked at the sky in the same way after spending an hour in there.
There are, of course, more than those three projects that I'm showing here.
I would definitely say that observing Vik Muniz' "Cloud" a couple of years ago in Manhattan for sure made me happy, as well.
But my last project is, again, from a young designer in New York.
He's from Korea originally.
And he took it upon himself to print 55,000 speech bubbles -- empty speech bubbles stickers, large ones and small ones.
And he goes around New York and just puts them, empty as they are, on posters.
(Laughter) And other people go and fill them in.
(Laughter) This one says, "Please let me die in peace."
(Laughter) I think that was -- the most surprising to myself was that the writing was actually so good.
This is on a musician poster, that says: "I am concerned that my CD will not sell more than 200,000 units and that, as a result, my recoupable advance from my label will be taken from me, after which, my contract will be cancelled, and I'll be back doing Journey covers on Bleecker Street."
(Laughter) I think the reason this works so well is because everybody involved wins.
Jee gets to have his project; the public gets a sweeter environment; and different public gets a place to express itself; and the advertisers finally get somebody to look at their ads.
(Laughter) Well, there was a question, of course, that was on my mind for a while: You know, can I do more of the things that I like doing in design and less of the ones that I don't like to be doing?
Which brought me back to my list making -- you know, just to see what I actually like about my job.
You know, one is: just working without pressure.
Then: working concentrated, without being frazzled.
Or, as Nancy said before, like really immerse oneself into it.
Try not to get stuck doing the same thing -- or try not get stuck behind the computer all day.
This is, you know, related to it: getting out of the studio.
Then, of course, trying to, you know, work on things where the content is actually important for me.
And being able to enjoy the end results.
And then I found another list in one of my diaries that actually contained all the things that I thought I learned in my life so far.
And, just about at that time, an Austrian magazine called and asked if we would want to do six spreads -- design six spreads that work like dividing pages between the different chapters in the magazine?
And the whole thing just fell together.
So I just picked one of the things that I thought I learned -- in this case, "Everything I do always comes back to me" -- and we made these spreads right out of this.
So it was: "Everything I do always comes back to me."
A couple of weeks ago, a (Laughter) French company asked us to design five billboards for them.
Again, we could supply the content for it.
So I just picked another one.
And this was two weeks ago.
We flew to Arizona -- the designer who works with me, and myself -- and photographed this one.
So it's: "Trying to look good limits my life."
And then we did one more of these.
This is, again, for a magazine, dividing pages.
This is: "Having" -- this is the same thing; it's just, you know, photographed from the side.
This is from the front.
Then it's: "guts."
Again, it's the same thing -- "guts" is just the same room, reworked.
Then it's: "always works out."
Then it's "for," with the light on.
(Laughter) And it's "me."
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
I thought I would read poems I have that relate to the subject of youth and age.
I was sort of astonished to find out how many I have actually.
The first one is dedicated to Spencer, and his grandmother, who was shocked by his work.
My poem is called "Dirt."
My grandmother is washing my mouth out with soap; half a long century gone and still she comes at me with that thick cruel yellow bar.
All because of a word I said, not even said really, only repeated.
But "Open," she says, "open up!"
her hand clawing at my head.
I know now her life was hard; she lost three children as babies, then her husband died too, leaving young sons, and no money.
She'd stand me in the sink to pee because there was never room in the toilet.
But oh, her soap!
Might its bitter burning have been what made me a poet?
The street she lived on was unpaved, her flat, two cramped rooms and a fetid kitchen where she stalked and caught me.
Dare I admit that after she did it I never really loved her again?
She lived to a hundred, even then. All along it was the sadness, the squalor, but I never, until now loved her again.
When that was published in a magazine I got an irate letter from my uncle.
"You have maligned a great woman."
It took some diplomacy.
This is called "The Dress."
It's a longer poem.
In those days, those days which exist for me only as the most elusive memory now, when often the first sound you'd hear in the morning would be a storm of birdsong, then the soft clop of the hooves of the horse hauling a milk wagon down your block, and the last sound at night as likely as not would be your father pulling up in his car, having worked late again, always late, and going heavily down to the cellar, to the furnace, to shake out the ashes and damp the draft before he came upstairs to fall into bed -- in those long-ago days, women, my mother, my friends' mothers, our neighbors, all the women I knew -- wore, often much of the day, what were called housedresses, cheap, printed, pulpy, seemingly purposefully shapeless light cotton shifts that you wore over your nightgown and, when you had to go look for a child, hang wash on the line, or run down to the grocery store on the corner, under a coat, the twisted hem of the nightgown always lank and yellowed, dangling beneath.
More than the curlers some of the women seemed constantly to have in their hair in preparation for some great event -- a ball, one would think -- that never came to pass; more than the way most women's faces not only were never made up during the day, but seemed scraped, bleached, and, with their plucked eyebrows, scarily masklike; more than all that it was those dresses that made women so unknowable and forbidding, adepts of enigmas to which men could have no access, and boys no conception.
Only later would I see the dresses also as a proclamation: that in your dim kitchen, your laundry, your bleak concrete yard, what you revealed of yourself was a fabulation; your real sensual nature, veiled in those sexless vestments, was utterly your dominion.
In those days, one hid much else as well: grown men didn't embrace one another, unless someone had died, and not always then; you shook hands or, at a ball game, thumped your friend's back and exchanged blows meant to be codes for affection; once out of childhood you'd never again know the shock of your father's whiskers on your cheek, not until mores at last had evolved, and you could hug another man, then hold on for a moment, then even kiss (your fathers bristles white and stiff now).
What release finally, the embrace: though we were wary -- it seemed so audacious -- how much unspoken joy there was in that affirmation of equality and communion, no matter how much misunderstanding and pain had passed between you by then.
We knew so little in those days, as little as now, I suppose about healing those hurts: even the women, in their best dresses, with beads and sequins sewn on the bodices, even in lipstick and mascara, their hair aflow, could only stand wringing their hands, begging for peace, while father and son, like thugs, like thieves, like Romans, simmered and hissed and hated, inflicting sorrows that endured, the worst anyway, through the kiss and embrace, bleeding from brother to brother, into the generations.
In those days there was still countryside close to the city, farms, cornfields, cows; even not far from our building with its blurred brick and long shadowy hallway you could find tracts with hills and trees you could pretend were mountains and forests.
Or you could go out by yourself even to a half-block-long empty lot, into the bushes: like a creature of leaves you'd lurk, crouched, crawling, simplified, savage, alone; already there was wanting to be simpler, wanting, when they called you, never to go back.
(Applause) This is another longish one, about the old and the young.
It actually happened right at the time we met.
Part of the poem takes place in space we shared and time we shared.
It's called "The Neighbor."
Her five horrid, deformed little dogs who incessantly yap on the roof under my window.
Her cats, God knows how many, who must piss on her rugs -- her landing's a sickening reek.
Her shadow once, fumbling the chain on her door, then the door slamming fearfully shut, only the barking and the music -- jazz -- filtering as it does, day and night into the hall.
The time it was Chris Connor singing "Lush Life" -- how it brought back my college sweetheart, my first real love, who -- till I left her -- played the same record.
And head on my shoulder, hand on my thigh, sang sweetly along, of regrets and depletions she was too young for, as I was too young, later, to believe in her pain.
It startled, then bored, then repelled me.
My starting to fancy she'd ended up in this fire-trap in the Village, that my neighbor was her.
My thinking we'd meet, recognize one another, become friends, that I'd accomplish a penance.
My seeing her, it wasn't her, at the mailbox.
Gray-yellow hair, army pants under a nightgown, her turning away, hiding her ravaged face in her hands, muttering an inappropriate "Hi."
Sometimes there are frightening goings-on in the stairwell.
A man shouting, "Shut up!" The dogs frantically snarling, claws scrabbling, then her -- her voice hoarse, harsh, hollow, almost only a tone, incoherent, a note, a squawk, bone on metal, metal gone molten, calling them back, "Come back darlings, come back dear ones.
My sweet angels, come back."
Medea she was, next time I saw her.
Sorceress, tranced, ecstatic, stock-still on the sidewalk ragged coat hanging agape, passersby flowing around her, her mouth torn suddenly open as though in a scream, silently though, as though only in her brain or breast had it erupted.
A cry so pure, practiced, detached, it had no need of a voice, or could no longer bear one.
These invisible links that allure, these transfigurations, even of anguish, that hold us.
The girl, my old love, the last lost time I saw her when she came to find me at a party, her drunkenly stumbling, falling, sprawling, skirt hiked, eyes veined red, swollen with tears, her shame, her dishonor.
My ignorant, arrogant coarseness, my secret pride, my turning away.
Still life on a rooftop, dead trees in barrels, a bench broken, dogs, excrement, sky.
What pathways through pain, what junctures of vulnerability, what crossings and counterings?
Too many lives in our lives already, too many chances for sorrow, too many unaccounted-for pasts.
"Behold me," the god of frenzied, inexhaustible love says, rising in bloody splendor, "Behold me."
Her making her way down the littered vestibule stairs, one agonized step at a time.
My holding the door.
Her crossing the fragmented tiles, faltering at the step to the street, droning, not looking at me, "Can you help me?"
Taking my arm, leaning lightly against me.
Her wavering step into the world.
Her whispering, "Thanks love." Lightly, lightly against me.
(Applause) I think I'll lighten up a little.
(Laughter) Another, different kind of poem of youth and age.
It's called "Gas."
(Laughter) Wouldn't it be nice, I think, when the blue-haired lady in the doctor's waiting room bends over the magazine table and farts, just a little, and violently blushes.
Wouldn't it be nice if intestinal gas came embodied in visible clouds, so she could see that her really quite inoffensive pop had only barely grazed my face before it drifted away.
(Laughter) Besides, for this to have happened now is a nice coincidence. Because not an hour ago, while we were on our walk, my dog was startled by a backfire and jumped straight up like a horse bucking.
And that brought back to me the stable I worked on weekends when I was 12, and a splendid piebald stallion, who whenever he was mounted would buck just like that, though more hugely of course, enormous, gleaming, resplendent.
And the woman, her face abashedly buried in her "Elle" now, reminded me -- I'd forgotten that not the least part of my awe consisted of the fact that with every jump he took the horse would powerfully fart.
Phwap! Phwap! Phwap!
Something never mentioned in the dozens of books about horses and their riders I devoured in those days.
All that savage grandeur, the steely glinting hooves, the eruptions driven from the creature's mighty innards, breath stopped, heart stopped, nostrils madly flared, I didn't know if I wanted to break him, or be him.
(Laughter) (Applause) This is called "Thirst."
Many -- most of my poems actually are urban poems. I happen to be reading a bunch that aren't.
"Thirst."
Here was my relation with the woman who lived all last autumn and winter, day and night, on a bench in the 103rd Street subway station, until finally one day she vanished.
We regarded each other, scrutinized one another.
Me shyly, obliquely, trying not to be furtive.
She boldly, unblinkingly, even pugnaciously, wrathfully even, when her bottle was empty.
I was frightened of her. I felt like a child.
I was afraid some repressed part of myself would go out of control, and I'd be forever entrapped in the shocking seethe of her stench.
Not excrement merely, not merely surface and orifice going unwashed, rediffusion of rum, there was will in it, and intention, power and purpose -- a social, ethical rage and rebellion -- despair too, though, grief, loss.
Sometimes I'd think I should take her home with me, bathe her, comfort her, dress her.
She wouldn't have wanted me to, I would think.
Instead, I'd step into my train.
How rich I would think, is the lexicon of our self-absolving.
How enduring, our bland fatal assurance that reflection is righteousness being accomplished.
The dance of our glances, the clash, pulling each other through our perceptual punctures, then holocaust, holocaust, host on host of ill, injured presences, squandered, consumed.
Her vigil somewhere I know continues.
Her occupancy, her absolute, faithful attendance.
The dance of our glances, challenge, abdication, effacement, the perfume of our consternation.
(Applause) This is a newer poem, a brand new poem.
The title is "This Happened."
A student, a young woman in a fourth-floor hallway of her lycee, perched on the ledge of an open window chatting with friends between classes; a teacher passes and chides her, "Be careful, you might fall," almost banteringly chides her, "You might fall," and the young woman, 18, a girl really, though she wouldn't think that, as brilliant as she is, first in her class, and "Beautiful, too," she's often told, smiles back, and leans into the open window, which wouldn't even be open if it were winter -- if it were winter someone would have closed it ("Close it!") -- leans into the window, farther, still smiling, farther and farther, though it takes less time than this, really an instant, and lets herself fall.
Herself fall.
A casual impulse, a fancy, never thought of until now, hardly thought of even now ...
No, more than impulse or fancy, the girl knows what she's doing, the girl means something, the girl means to mean, because it occurs to her in that instant, that beautiful or not, bright yes or no, she's not who she is, she's not the person she is, and the reason, she suddenly knows, is that there's been so much premeditation where she is, so much plotting and planning, there's hardly a person where she is, or if there is, it's not her, or not wholly her, it's a self inhabited, lived in by her, and seemingly even as she thinks it she knows what's been missing: grace, not premeditation but grace, a kind of being in the world spontaneously, with grace.
Weightfully upon me was the world.
Weightfully this self which graced the world yet never wholly itself.
Weightfully this self which weighed upon me, the release from which is what I desire and what I achieve.
And the girl remembers, in this infinite instant already now so many times divided, the sadness she felt once, hardly knowing she felt it, to merely inhabit herself.
Yes, the girl falls, absurd to fall, even the earth with its compulsion to take unto itself all that falls must know that falling is absurd, yet the girl falling isn't myself, or she is myself, but a self I took of my own volition unto myself.
Forever. With grace.
This happened.
(Applause) I'll read just one more. I don't usually say that.
I like to just end.
But I'm afraid that Ricky will come out here and shake his fist at me.
This is called "Old Man," appropriately enough.
"Special: big tits," Says the advertisement for a soft-core magazine on our neighborhood newsstand.
But forget her breasts.
A lush, fresh-lipped blond, skin glowing gold, sprawls there, resplendent.
60 nearly, yet these hardly tangible, hardly better than harlots, can still stir me.
Maybe a coming of age in the American sensual darkness, never seeing an unsmudged nipple, an uncensored vagina, has left me forever infected with an unquenchable lust of the eye.
Always that erotic murmur, I'm hardly myself if I'm not in a state of incipient desire.
God knows though, there are worse twists your obsessions can take.
Last year in Israel, a young ultra-orthodox Rabbi guiding some teenage girls through the Shrine of the Shoah forbade them to look in one room.
Because there were images in it he said were licentious.
The display was a photo. Men and women stripped naked, some trying to cover their genitals, others too frightened to bother, lined up in snow waiting to be shot and thrown into a ditch.
The girls, to my horror, averted their gaze.
What carnal mistrust had their teacher taught them.
Even that though. Another confession: Once in a book on pre-war Poland, a studio portrait, an absolute angel, an absolute angel with tormented, tormenting eyes.
I kept finding myself at her page.
That she died in the camps made her -- I didn't dare wonder why -- more present, more precious.
Died in the camps, that too people -- or Jews anyway -- kept from their children back then.
But it was like sex, you didn't have to be told.
Sex and death, how close they can seem.
So constantly conscious now of death moving towards me, sometimes I think I confound them.
My wife's loveliness almost consumes me.
My passion for her goes beyond reasonable bounds.
When we make love, her holding me everywhere all around me, I'm there and not there.
My mind teems, jumbles of faces, voices, impressions, I live my life over, as though I were drowning.
Then I am drowning, in despair at having to leave her, this, everything, all, unbearable, awful.
Still, to be able to die with no special contrition, not having been slaughtered, or enslaved.
And not having to know history's next mad rage or regression, it might be a relief.
No. Again, no.
I don't mean that for a moment.
What I mean is the world holds me so tightly -- the good and the bad -- my own follies and weakness that even this counterfeit Venus with her sham heat, and her bosom probably plumped with gel, so moves me my breath catches.
Vamp. Siren. Seductress.
How much more she reveals in her glare of ink than she knows.
How she incarnates our desperate human need for regard, our passion to live in beauty, to be beauty, to be cherished by glances, if by no more, of something like love, or love.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Newspapers are dying for a few reasons.
Readers don't want to pay for yesterday's news, and advertisers follow them.
Your iPhone, your laptop, is much more handy than New York Times on Sunday.
And we should save trees in the end.
So it's enough to bury any industry.
So, should we rather ask, "Can anything save newspapers?"
There are several scenarios for the future newspaper.
Some people say it should be free; it should be tabloid, or even smaller: A4; it should be local, run by communities, or niche, for some smaller groups like business -- but then it's not free; it's very expensive.
It should be opinion-driven; less news, more views.
And we'd rather read it during breakfast, because later we listen to radio in a car, check your mail at work and in the evening you watch TV.
Sounds nice, but this can only buy time.
Because in the long run, I think there is no reason, no practical reason for newspapers to survive.
So what can we do?
(Laughter) Let me tell you my story.
20 years ago, Bonnier, Swedish publisher, started to set newspapers in the former Soviet Bloc.
After a few years, they had several newspapers in central and eastern Europe.
They were run by an inexperienced staff, with no visual culture, no budgets for visuals -- in many places there were not even art directors.
I decided to be -- to work for them as an art director.
Before, I was an architect, and my grandmother asked me once, "What are you doing for a living?"
I said, "I'm designing newspapers."
"What? There's nothing to design there. It's just boring letters" (Laughter) And she was right. I was very frustrated, until one day.
I came to London, and I've seen performance by Cirque du Soleil.
And I had a revelation. I thought, "These guys took some creepy, run-down entertainment, and put it to the highest possible level of performance art."
I thought "Oh my God, maybe I can do the same with these boring newspapers."
And I did. We started to redesign them, one by one.
The front page became our signature.
It was my personal intimate channel to talk to the readers.
I'm not going to tell you stories about teamwork or cooperation.
My approach was very egotistic.
I wanted my artistic statement, my interpretation of reality.
I wanted to make posters, not newspapers.
Not even magazines: posters.
We were experimenting with type, with illustration, with photos. And we had fun.
Soon it started to bring results.
In Poland, our pages were named "Covers of the Year" three times in a row.
Other examples you can see here are from Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia and central European countries.
But it's not only about the front page.
The secret is that we were treating the whole newspaper as one piece, as one composition -- like music.
And music has a rhythm, has ups and downs.
And design is responsible for this experience.
Flipping through pages is readers experience, and I'm responsible for this experience.
We treated two pages, both spreads, as a one page, because that's how readers perceive it.
You can see some Russian pages here which got many awards on biggest infographic competition in Spain.
But the real award came from Society for Newspaper Design.
Just a year after redesigning this newspaper in Poland, they name it the World's Best-Designed Newspaper.
And two years later, the same award came to Estonia.
Isn't amazing?
What really makes it amazing: that the circulation of these newspapers were growing too.
Just some examples: in Russia, plus 11 after one year, plus 29 after three years of the redesign.
Same in Poland: plus 13, up to 35 percent raise of circulation after three years.
You can see on a graph, after years of stagnation, the paper started to grow, just after redesign.
But the real hit was in Bulgaria.
And that is really amazing.
Did design do this?
Design was just a part of the process.
And the process we made was not about changing the look, it was about improving the product completely.
I took an architectural rule about function and form and translated it into newspaper content and design.
And I put strategy at the top of it.
So first you ask a big question: why we do it? What is the goal?
Then we adjust the content accordingly.
And then, usually after two months, we start designing.
My bosses, in the beginning, were very surprised.
Why am I asking all of these business questions, instead of just showing them pages?
But soon they realized that this is the new role of designer: to be in this process from the very beginning to the very end.
So what is the lesson behind it?
The first lesson is about that design can change not just your product.
It can change your workflow -- actually, it can change everything in your company; it can turn your company upside down.
It can even change you.
And who's responsible? Designers.
Give power to designers.
(Applause) But the second is even more important.
You can live in a small poor country, like me.
You can work for a small company, in a boring branch.
You can have no budgets, no people -- but still can put your work to the highest possible level.
And everybody can do it.
You just need inspiration, vision and determination.
And you need to remember that to be good is not enough.
Thank you.
I started with paragliding.
Paragliding is taking off from mountains with a paraglider, with the possibility to fly cross-country, distance, just with the use of thermals to soar.
Also different aerobatic maneuvers are possible with a paraglider.
From there I started with skydiving.
In this picture you can see there is a four-way skydive, four people flying together, and on the left hand side it's the camera flier with the camera mounted to his helmet so he can film the whole jump, for the film itself and also for the judging.
From regular, relative skydiving I went on to freeflying.
Freeflying is more the three-dimensional skydiving.
You can see the skydiver with the red suit, he's in a stand-up position.
The one with the yellow-green suit, he's flying head-down.
And that's me in the background, carving around the whole formation in freefall also, with the helmet cam to film this jump.
From freeflying I went on to skysurfing.
Skysurfing is skydiving with a board on the feet.
You can imagine with this big surface of a skysurfing board, there is a lot of force, a lot of power.
Of course I can use this power for example for nice spinning -- we call it "helicopter moves."
From there I went on to wingsuit flying.
Wingsuit flying is a suit, that I can make fly, just only with my body.
If I put some tension on my body, tension on my suit, I can make it fly. And as you see the fall rate is much much slower because of the bigger surface.
With a proper body position I'm able to really move forward to gain quite some distance.
This is a jump I did in Rio de Janeiro.
You can see the Copacabana on the left-hand side.
From there with all the skills and knowledge from paragliding and all the different disciplines in skydiving, I went on to BASE jumping.
BASE jumping is skydiving from fixed objects, like buildings, antennae, bridges and earth -- meaning mountains, cliffs.
It's for sure -- for me -- it's the ultimate feeling of being in free fall, with all the visual references.
So my goal soon was to discover new places that nobody had jumped before.
So in summer 2000 I was the first to BASE jump the Eiger North Face in Switzerland.
Two years after this, I was the first to BASE jump from Matterhorn, a very famous mountain that probably everybody knows in here.
2005 I did a BASE jump from the Eiger, from the Monk and from the Jungfrau, three very famous mountains in Switzerland.
The special thing on these three jumps were, I hiked them all and climbed them all in only one day.
In 2008 I jumped the Eiffel Tower in Paris.
(Laughter) So with all this knowledge, I also wanted to get into stunts.
So with some friends we started to do different tricks, like for example this jump here, I jumped from a paraglider.
Or here -- everybody was freezing, pretty much, except me, because it was very cold in Austria where we did this filming.
Everybody sitting in a basket, and I was on top of the balloon, ready to slide down with my skysurf board.
Or this jump, from a moving truck on the highway.
(Laughter) Extreme sports on top level like this is only possible if you practice step by step, if you really work hard on your skills and on your knowledge.
Of course you need to be in physical, very good, condition, so I'm training a lot.
You need to have the best possible equipment.
And probably the most important is you have to work on your mental skills, mental preparation.
And all this to come as close as possible to the human dream of being able to fly.
So for 2009, I'm training hard for my two new projects.
The first one, I want to set a world record in flying from a cliff with my wingsuit.
And I want to set a new record, with the longest distance ever flown.
For my second project, I have a sensational idea of a jump that never has been done before.
So now, on the following movie you will see that I'm much better in flying a wingsuit than speaking in English.
Enjoy, and thank you very much.
(Applause) (Applause) June Cohen: I have some questions.
I think we all might have some questions.
Question one: so does that actually feel the way the flying dream does?
Because it looks like it might.
Ueli Gegenschatz: Pretty much. I believe this is probably the closest possibility to come to the dream of being able to fly.
JC: I know the answer to this, but how do you land?
UE: Parachute. We have to open a parachute just seconds before, I would say, impact.
(Laughter) It's not possible to land a wingsuit yet.
JC: Yet. But people are trying. Are you among those -- you're not going to commit -- are you among those trying to do it?
UE: It's a dream. It's a dream. Yeah.
We're still working on it and we're developing the wingsuits to get better performance, to get more knowledge.
And I believe soon.
JC: All right. Well we will watch this space. But I have two more questions.
What is the -- there was exhaust coming out of the back of the wingsuit. Was that a propelled wingsuit that you were wearing?
UE: Nope. It's just smoke.
JC: Coming off of you?
(Laughter) UE: Hopefully not.
(Laughter) JC: That seems dangerous.
UE: No, smoke is for two reasons, you can see the speed, you can see the way where I was flying.
That's reason number one. And reason number two: it's much easier for the camera guy to film If I'm using smoke.
JC: Ah, I see. So the wingsuit is set up to deliberately release smoke so that you can be tracked. One more question.
What do you do to to cover your face?
Because I just keep thinking of going that fast and having your whole face smushed backwards.
Are you in a helmet? Are you in goggles?
UE: The purest and the best feeling would be with only goggles.
JC: And is that how you usually fly?
UE: Usually I'm wearing a helmet. In the mountains I'm always wearing a helmet because of landings -- usually it's difficult -- it's not like regular skydiving where you have like the big landings.
So you have to be prepared.
JC: Right. Now is there anything you don't do?
Do people come to you with projects and say, "We want you to do this!"
and do you ever say, "No, no I'm not going to."
UE: Oh of course, of course. Some people have crazy ideas and -- (Laughter) JC: ...a round of applause...
(Applause) UE: Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I was asked by Wilsonart International, a plastic laminate company, which is the largest plastic laminate company in the world -- they asked me to design a trade show booth for exhibition at the International Contemporary Furniture Fair in New York, in 2000.
So looking at their three main markets for their product which were basically transportation design, interiors and furniture, we came up with the solution of taking an old Airstream trailer and gutting it, and trying to portray laminate, and a trailer, in kind of a fresh, new contemporary look.
When this trailer showed up at my shop in Berkeley, I'd actually never stepped foot in an Airstream trailer, or any other trailer.
So I can be somebody that can look at this in a totally fresh perspective and see if I can optimize it in its most idealistic fashion.
I decided I had to do some research and really figure out what had gone wrong somewhere along the history of Airstream.
What I discovered in these interiors is that there was a disconnect between the exterior shell and the interior architecture of the pieces.
In that the shell was originally conceived as a lightweight, modern, futuristic, high-tech pod for hurtling down the freeway, and the interiors were completely out of sync with that.
In fact it appeared like they referenced a mountain cabin.
That seemed really like a crisis to me, that they had never been able to develop a vocabulary about escape, and about travel, and modernity in this trailer that was consistent with the shell.
We really needed to do some archeology in the trailer itself to figure out what's authentic in an Airstream trailer, and what feels like it has true purpose and utility.
We stripped out all the vinyl and zolatone paint that was covering up this just fantastic aluminum shell.
We took off all the visible hardware and trim that was kind of doing the country cabin thing.
I literally drew on the walls of the trailer, mocked it up in cardboard, we'd come in and cut, decide things were wrong, pull it out, put it back in.
The main goal was to smooth out the interior, and begin to speak about motion, and mobility, and independence.
The biggest difficulty on one of these trailers is that when you're designing there's actually no logical place to stop and start materials because of the continuous form of the trailer.
There's no such things as two walls and a ceiling coming together, where you can change materials and shapes.
So that became a challenge.
Compounding that, the material of choice, laminate, that I was trying to highlight, only bends in two dimensions.
It's a compound curve interior.
What I had to devise was a way of fooling the eye into believing that all these panels are curved with the shell.
What I came up with was a series of second skins that basically float over the aluminum shell.
And what I was trying to do there was direct your eye in the space, so that you would perceive the geometry in a different way, and that the casework wouldn't break up the space.
They also gave us a way to run power and rewire the trailer without tearing out the skin, so they function as an electrical chase.
That's the trailer, pretty much finished.
That trailer led to another commission, to participate in whats called Tokyo Designers Block.
Its a week of furniture design events in Tokyo, in October.
Teruo Kurosaki, who owns a furniture company called Idee, he asked me to ship him two trailers to Tokyo.
He said one he would like to make a real trailer, functioning, and we would sell that one.
Trailer number two, you have a blank slate, you can to anything you want.
We came up with a fantasy scenario of a DJ traveling around the States, that would collect records and go on tours.
This trailer housed two turntables, mixer, wet bar, fridge, integrated sound system.
It's got a huge couch, fits quite a few people, and basically we'd had a great time with this.
And so in this trailer I took it upon myself to think about travel, and escape, in an idiosyncratic sense.
A lot of these ideas migrated into the production trailers for Airstream.
This brings us up to the time that I started consulting to Airstream.
They came to me and said, "Well, what can we do to freshen this thing up?
And do you think kids, you know, skateboarders, surfers, rock climbers, would use these things?"
And I said, "Well, not in that interior."
(Laughter) Anyway, I went out to Airstream about six times during the process of building this prototype, and it's called the Bambi prototype.
I thought, "Finally, oh yeah great, big company, I'm gonna work with somebody with money for tooling and molding."
And I walked in their prototype facility, and it's exactly like my shop, only bigger -- same tools, same things.
So the problem became -- and they set this dilemma to me -- that you have to design the interior using only our existing technology, and there's no money for tooling or molding.
The trailers themselves are actually hand-built.
All the casework is hand-scribed in, uniquely, so you can't just cut 100 parts for 100 trailers, you have to cut them big, and every single one is hand-fit.
They didn't want to go to a componentized system.
And there it is, that's the Bambi 16.
(Applause)
I thought I'd begin with a scene of war.
There was little to warn of the danger ahead.
The Iraqi insurgent had placed the IED, an Improvised Explosive Device, along the side of the road with great care.
By 2006, there were more than 2,500 of these attacks every single month, and they were the leading cause of casualties among American soldiers and Iraqi civilians.
The team that was hunting for this IED is called an EOD team Explosives Ordinance Disposaland they're the pointy end of the spear in the American effort to suppress these roadside bombs.
Each EOD team goes out on about 600 of these bomb calls every year, defusing about two bombs a day.
Perhaps the best sign of how valuable they are to the war effort, is that the Iraqi insurgents put a $50,000 bounty on the head of a single EOD soldier.
Unfortunately, this particular call would not end well.
By the time the soldier advanced close enough to see the telltale wires of the bomb, it exploded in a wave of flame.
Now, depending how close you are and how much explosive has been packed into that bomb, it can cause death or injury. You have to be as far as 50 yards away to escape that.
The blast is so strong it can even break your limbs, even if you're not hit.
That soldier had been on top of the bomb.
And so when the rest of the team advanced they found little left. And that night the unit's commander did a sad duty, and he wrote a condolence letter back to the United States, and he talked about how hard the loss had been on his unit, about the fact that they had lost their bravest soldier, a soldier who had saved their lives many a time.
And he apologized for not being able to bring them home.
But then he talked up the silver lining that he took away from the loss.
"At least," as he wrote, "when a robot dies, you don't have to write a letter to its mother."
That scene sounds like science fiction, but is battlefield reality already.
The soldier in that case was a 42-pound robot called a PackBot.
The chief's letter went, not to some farmhouse in Iowa like you see in the old war movies, but went to the iRobot Company, which is named after the Asimov novel and the not-so-great Will Smith movie, and... um... (Laughter)...
if you remember that in that fictional world, robots started out carrying out mundane chores, and then they started taking on life-and-death decisions.
That's a reality we face today.
What we're going to do is actually just flash a series of photos behind me that show you the reality of robots used in war right now or already at the prototype stage.
It's just to give you a taste.
Another way of putting it is you're not going to see anything that's powered by Vulcan technology, or teenage wizard hormones or anything like that.
This is all real. So why don't we go ahead and start those pictures.
Something big is going on in war today, and maybe even the history of humanity itself. The U.S. military went into Iraq with a handful of drones in the air.
We now have 5,300.
We went in with zero unmanned ground systems. We now have 12,000.
And the tech term "killer application" takes on new meaning in this space.
And we need to remember that we're talking about the Model T Fords, the Wright Flyers, compared to what's coming soon.
That's where we're at right now.
One of the people that I recently met with was an Air Force three-star general, and he said basically, where we're headed very soon is tens of thousands of robots operating in our conflicts, and these numbers matter, because we're not just talking about tens of thousands of today's robots, but tens of thousands of these prototypes and tomorrow's robots, because of course, one of the things that's operating in technology is Moore's Law, that you can pack in more and more computing power into those robots, and so flash forward around 25 years, if Moore's Law holds true, those robots will be close to a billion times more powerful in their computing than today.
And so what that means is the kind of things that we used to only talk about at science fiction conventions like Comic-Con have to be talked about in the halls of power and places like the Pentagon.
A robots revolution is upon us.
Now, I need to be clear here.
I'm not talking about a revolution where you have to worry about the Governor of California showing up at your door, a la the Terminator. (Laughter) When historians look at this period, they're going to conclude that we're in a different type of revolution: a revolution in war, like the invention of the atomic bomb.
But it may be even bigger than that, because our unmanned systems don't just affect the "how" of war-fighting, they affect the "who" of fighting at its most fundamental level.
That is, every previous revolution in war, be it the machine gun, be it the atomic bomb, was about a system that either shot faster, went further, had a bigger boom.
That's certainly the case with robotics, but they also change the experience of the warrior and even the very identity of the warrior.
Another way of putting this is that mankind's 5,000-year-old monopoly on the fighting of war is breaking down in our very lifetime. I've spent the last several years going around meeting with all the players in this field, from the robot scientists to the science fiction authors who inspired them to the 19-year-old drone pilots who are fighting from Nevada, to the four-star generals who command them, to even the Iraqi insurgents who they are targeting and what they think about our systems, and what I found interesting is not just their stories, but how their experiences point to these ripple effects that are going outwards in our society, in our law and our ethics, etc. And so what I'd like to do with my remaining time is basically flesh out a couple of these.
So the first is that the future of war, even a robotics one, is not going to be purely an American one.
The U.S. is currently ahead in military robotics right now, but we know that in technology there's no such thing as a permanent first move or advantage.
In a quick show of hands, how many people in this room still use Wang Computers? (Laughter) It's the same thing in war. The British and the French invented the tank.
The Germans figured out how to use it right, and so what we have to think about for the U.S. is that we are ahead right now, but you have 43 other countries out there working on military robotics, and they include all the interesting countries like Russia, China, Pakistan, Iran.
And this raises a bigger worry for me.
How do we move forward in this revolution given the state of our manufacturing and the state of our science and mathematics training in our schools?
Or another way of thinking about this is, what does it mean to go to war increasingly with soldiers whose hardware is made in China and software is written in India?
But just as software has gone open-source, so has warfare.
Unlike an aircraft carrier or an atomic bomb, you don't need a massive manufacturing system to build robotics. A lot of it is off the shelf. A lot of it's even do-it-yourself.
One of those things you just saw flashed before you was a raven drone, the handheld tossed one. For about a thousand dollars, you can build one yourself, equivalent to what the soldiers use in Iraq.
That raises another wrinkle when it comes to war and conflict. Good guys might play around and work on these as hobby kits, but so might bad guys.
This cross between robotics and things like terrorism is going to be fascinating and even disturbing, and we've already seen it start.
During the war between Israel, a state, and Hezbollah, a non-state actor, the non-state actor flew four different drones against Israel.
There's already a jihadi website that you can go on and remotely detonate an IED in Iraq while sitting at your home computer.
And so I think what we're going to see is two trends take place with this.
First is, you're going to reinforce the power of individuals against governments, but then the second is that we are going to see an expansion in the realm of terrorism.
The future of it may be a cross between al Qaeda 2.0 and the next generation of the Unabomber.
And another way of thinking about this is the fact that, remember, you don't have to convince a robot that they're gonna receive 72 virgins after they die to convince them to blow themselves up.
But the ripple effects of this are going to go out into our politics. One of the people that I met with was a former Assistant Secretary of Defense for Ronald Reagan, and he put it this way: "I like these systems because they save American lives, but I worry about more marketization of wars, more shock-and-awe talk, to defray discussion of the costs.
People are more likely to support the use of force if they view it as costless."
Robots for me take certain trends that are already in play in our body politic, and maybe take them to their logical ending point.
We don't have a draft. We don't have declarations of war anymore.
We don't buy war bonds anymore.
And now we have the fact that we're converting more and more of our American soldiers that we would send into harm's way into machines, and so we may take those already lowering bars to war and drop them to the ground.
But the future of war is also going to be a YouTube war.
That is, our new technologies don't merely remove humans from risk.
They also record everything that they see.
So they don't just delink the public: they reshape its relationship with war.
There's already several thousand video clips of combat footage from Iraq on YouTube right now, most of it gathered by drones.
Now, this could be a good thing.
It could be building connections between the home front and the war front as never before.
But remember, this is taking place in our strange, weird world, and so inevitably the ability to download these video clips to, you know, your iPod or your Zune gives you the ability to turn it into entertainment.
Soldiers have a name for these clips.
They call it war porn.
The typical one that I was sent was an email that had an attachment of video of a Predator strike taking out an enemy site. Missile hits, bodies burst into the air with the explosion.
It was set to music.
It was set to the pop song "I Just Want To Fly" by Sugar Ray.
This ability to watch more but experience less creates a wrinkle in the public's relationship with war.
I think about this with a sports parallel.
It's like the difference between watching an NBA game, a professional basketball game on TV, where the athletes are tiny figures on the screen, and being at that basketball game in person and realizing what someone seven feet really does look like.
But we have to remember, these are just the clips.
These are just the ESPN SportsCenter version of the game. They lose the context.
They lose the strategy.
They lose the humanity. War just becomes slam dunks and smart bombs.
Now the irony of all this is that while the future of war may involve more and more machines, it's our human psychology that's driving all of this, it's our human failings that are leading to these wars.
So one example of this that has big resonance in the policy realm is how this plays out on our very real war of ideas that we're fighting against radical groups.
What is the message that we think we are sending with these machines versus what is being received in terms of the message.
So one of the people that I met was a senior Bush Administration official, who had this to say about our unmanning of war: "It plays to our strength. The thing that scares people is our technology."
But when you go out and meet with people, for example in Lebanon, it's a very different story. One of the people I met with there was a news editor, and we're talking as a drone is flying above him, and this is what he had to say.
"This is just another sign of the coldhearted cruel Israelis and Americans, who are cowards because they send out machines to fight us.
They don't want to fight us like real men, but they're afraid to fight, so we just have to kill a few of their soldiers to defeat them."
The future of war also is featuring a new type of warrior, and it's actually redefining the experience of going to war.
You can call this a cubicle warrior.
This is what one Predator drone pilot described of his experience fighting in the Iraq War while never leaving Nevada.
"You're going to war for 12 hours, shooting weapons at targets, directing kills on enemy combatants, and then you get in the car and you drive home and within 20 minutes, you're sitting at the dinner table talking to your kids about their homework."
Now, the psychological balancing of those experiences is incredibly tough, and in fact those drone pilots have higher rates of PTSD than many of the units physically in Iraq.
But some have worries that this disconnection will lead to something else, that it might make the contemplation of war crimes a lot easier when you have this distance. "It's like a video game," is what one young pilot described to me of taking out enemy troops from afar.
As anyone who's played Grand Theft Auto knows, we do things in the video world that we wouldn't do face to face.
So much of what you're hearing from me is that there's another side to technologic revolutions, and that it's shaping our present and maybe will shape our future of war.
Moore's Law is operative, but so's Murphy's Law.
The fog of war isn't being lifted.
The enemy has a vote.
We're gaining incredible new capabilities, but we're also seeing and experiencing new human dilemmas. Now, sometimes these are just "oops" moments, which is what the head of a robotics company described it, you just have "oops" moments. Well, what are "oops" moments with robots in war?
Well, sometimes they're funny. Sometimes, they're like that scene from the Eddie Murphy movie "Best Defense," playing out in reality, where they tested out a machine gun-armed robot, and during the demonstration it started spinning in a circle and pointed its machine gun at the reviewing stand of VIPs.
Fortunately the weapon wasn't loaded and no one was hurt, but other times "oops" moments are tragic, such as last year in South Africa, where an anti-aircraft cannon had a "software glitch," and actually did turn on and fired, and nine soldiers were killed.
We have new wrinkles in the laws of war and accountability. What do we do with things like unmanned slaughter?
What is unmanned slaughter?
We've already had three instances of Predator drone strikes where we thought we got bin Laden, and it turned out not to be the case.
And this is where we're at right now.
This is not even talking about armed, autonomous systems with full authority to use force.
And do not believe that that isn't coming.
During my research I came across four different Pentagon projects on different aspects of that.
And so you have this question: what does this lead to issues like war crimes? Robots are emotionless, so they don't get upset if their buddy is killed.
They don't commit crimes of rage and revenge.
But robots are emotionless.
They see an 80-year-old grandmother in a wheelchair the same way they see a T-80 tank: they're both just a series of zeroes and ones.
And so we have this question to figure out: How do we catch up our 20th century laws of war, that are so old right now that they could qualify for Medicare, to these 21st century technologies?
And so, in conclusion, I've talked about what seems the future of war, but notice that I've only used real world examples and you've only seen real world pictures and videos.
And so this sets a great challenge for all of us that we have to worry about well before you have to worry about your Roomba sucking the life away from you.
Are we going to let the fact that what's unveiling itself right now in war sounds like science fiction and therefore keeps us in denial?
Are we going to face the reality of 21st century war?
Is our generation going to make the same mistake that a past generation did with atomic weaponry, and not deal with the issues that surround it until Pandora's box is already opened up?
Now, I could be wrong on this, and one Pentagon robot scientist told me that I was. He said, "There's no real social, ethical, moral issues when it comes to robots.
That is," he added, "unless the machine kills the wrong people repeatedly.
Then it's just a product recall issue."
And so the ending point for this is that actually, we can turn to Hollywood.
A few years ago, Hollywood gathered all the top characters and created a list of the top 100 heroes and top 100 villains of all of Hollywood history, the characters that represented the best and worst of humanity.
Only one character made it onto both lists: The Terminator, a robot killing machine.
And so that points to the fact that our machines can be used for both good and evil, but for me it points to the fact that there's a duality of humans as well.
This week is a celebration of our creativity. Our creativity has taken our species to the stars.
Our creativity has created works of arts and literature to express our love.
And now, we're using our creativity in a certain direction, to build fantastic machines with incredible capabilities, maybe even one day an entirely new species.
But one of the main reasons that we're doing that is because of our drive to destroy each other, and so the question we all should ask: is it our machines, or is it us that's wired for war?
Thank you. (Applause)
The Silicon Valley and the internet gave me superpowers, tools to go to battle with, a suit to take bullets with and a giant signal in the sky that told me when it was time to fight.
Now, I can't actually prove any of this.
I am not a "scientist," I don't have "facts."
In fact, my Rotten Tomato score is running around 50 percent right now, so I'm not sure why they let me in.
(Laughter) But if we're talking about colliding with a power that's bigger than us, then I'm in the right place, because this last year, I had an interesting year with a movie called "Crazy Rich Asians" that I did -- (Applause and cheers) Thank you, thank you.
And if we're talking about connection specifically today, then I know my story is only possible because of a collection of connections that happened throughout my life, and so hopefully by telling a little bit of my story, it will help someone else find their path a little sooner than I did.
My story begins when I opened the holy book for the first time ...
The holy book of gadgets, of course, "Sharper Image."
(Laughter) Yes, those who know.
It was a magical magazine of dreams and had things in there that you knew could not possibly exist, but it was right there.
You could order it -- come in the mail.
And some things that probably should have never existed, like "Gregory," a lifelike, portable mannequin who deters crime by his strong, masculine appearance.
This is a real -- (Laughter) This is a real thing, by the way.
(Laughter) But my eyes were set on the Sima Video Ed/it 2.
This thing was so cool at the age of 10.
You could connect all your VHS players together and cut something together, so I called my parents and convinced them to buy this for me.
But before I get into that, let me give you a little rundown about my parents.
They came to the United States when they were young, they're from Taiwan and China and they settled in Los Altos, California -- the Silicon Valley before the Silicon Valley -- and they started a restaurant called Chef Chu's.
50 years later, today, they still work at the restaurant, they're still there, and I grew up there, so it was great.
Talk about connection -- this place was a hub of connection.
People coming there to celebrate birthdays, anniversaries, business deals, eating, drinking -- connection.
And I got to grow up in that environment.
And my parents always said America is the greatest place in the world.
You can -- if you love anything, you can work hard and you can accomplish anything you want.
So, they raised five all-American kids.
I am the youngest -- you can see I'm the one with the eyes closed there -- and they named actually my sister and I, Jennifer and Jonathan, after Jennifer and Jonathan Hart from that TV show "Hart to Hart."
(Laughter) So that's how much they loved America, apparently.
And they thought that we were The Kennedys -- my mom specifically -- so she dressed us up all the time like each other and she put us in etiquette classes and ballroom dance classes, made sure that we had the right dental plan -- (Laughter) This is a real picture of me. That is not fake.
Thank God for that one.
And I was in charge of the video camera every time we went on vacations, so I would collect all these videos and had nothing to do with it.
Thus, the Sima Video Ed/it 2.
I convinced them to get it for me, and I spent all night trying to wrangle all the VCRs from my brother's and sister's room, tangled in wires, and now I had something to show them.
So I brought them into the living room one night, it was probably 1991, somewhere around there, and I sit them down in the living room -- my heart was pounding, my breaths were deep -- sort of like right now -- and I pressed play and something extraordinary happened actually.
They cried.
And cried.
They cried not because it was the most amazing home video edit ever -- although it was pretty good -- (Laughter) but because they saw our family as a normal family that fit in and belonged on the screen in front of them, just like the movies that they worshipped and the TV shows that they named us after.
I remember as the youngest of these five kids feeling heard for the first time.
There was this place where all these things in my head could go into the great, electric somewhere-out-there and exist and escape, and I knew from this moment on, I wanted to do this for the rest of my life, whether I was going to get paid for it or not.
So I had this passion and now I needed some tools, and my dad went to work.
He continued to brag about my home video editing skills to the customers at Chef Chu's, and luckily this is the Silicon Valley, so they're working on stuff, hardware and software -- these are all engineers.
And they offered to give me things for digital video editing.
This is like the mid-'90s, early '90's, where this stuff didn't exist for kids like me.
So I'd get this beta software and hardware from places like HP and Sun and Russell Brown at Adobe.
And I had no manual, so I'd figure it out and I fell in love with it even more.
I went to USC School of Cinematic Arts and started to go there, and my mom and dad would always call me randomly and remind me that I've got to do movies about my Chinese heritage.
That China was going to be a huge market for movies one day.
I was like, "Yeah right, guys".
(Laughter) Always listen to your parents.
(Laughter) I wanted to be Zemeckis, Lucas and Spielberg.
The last thing I wanted to talk about was my own cultural identity, my ethnicity.
And honestly, I had no one else to talk -- there was no one at school that I could really open up to, and even if I did, like, what would I say?
So I ignored it and I moved on with my life.
Cut to 15 years later, I made it in Hollywood.
I got discovered by Spielberg, I worked with The Rock and Bruce Willis and Justin Bieber.
I even came to the TED stage to present my dance company LXD, and it was great.
And then a couple years ago, I felt a little bit lost, creatively.
The engine was going down a little bit, and I got a sign ...
I heard from voices from the sky ...
or more it was like, birds.
OK, fine, it was Twitter.
And Twitter -- (Laughter) It was Constance Wu on Twitter, it was Daniel Dae Kim, it was Jenny Yang, who's here today, it was Alan Yang -- all of these people who were writing their frustrations with representation in Hollywood.
And it really hit me.
I thought these things but never really registered -- I was really focused on -- and I felt lucky to be working, and so then I realized -- yeah, what is wrong with Hollywood?
Why aren't they doing this?
And then I looked at myself in the mirror and realized I am Hollywood.
I literally -- I popped my collar before I came out here, that's how Hollywood I am.
(Laughter) Is it still up? OK, good.
(Applause) For all these years I felt I had been given so much, and what was I giving back to the film business that I loved?
I felt lucky to be here, but at this moment, I realized that I was not just lucky to be here, I had the right to be here.
No, I earned the right to be here.
All those sleepless nights, all those parties I missed on Fridays, every friend and girlfriend I lost because I was editing -- I earned the right to be here not just to have a voice but to say something, and say something important, and I had, actually, the power -- the superpower to change things if I really, really wanted to.
When you try to tell stories about yourself and people who look like you and look like your family, it can be scary, and all those feelings of being alone came back.
But the internet is what told me -- sent the sign that there was going to be a whole army waiting for me to support me and to love me for it.
And so I found Kevin Kwan's amazing novel "Crazy Rich Asians," and we went to work.
We put this movie together.
All-Asian cast -- the first all-Asian cast in 25 years with a contemporary story -- (Applause and cheers) But when we started it was not a guarantee at all.
There was no comp for this kind of movie.
Every time we did surveys and stuff, the audiences weren't going to show up.
In fact, even in our test screenings where you give free tickets to people to watch your movie, we had a one to 25 ratio, meaning after 25 asks, only one person said yes, which is super low for these types of things.
Asian people who knew the book didn't trust Hollywood at all, Asian people who didn't know the book thought the title was offensive and other people who weren't Asian just didn't think it was for them.
So we were pretty screwed.
Luckily, Warner Brothers didn't turn away from us.
But then the electric somewhere struck again, and this army of Asian-American writers, reporters, bloggers, who over the years had worked their way up through their respective publications, went to work, unbeknownst to me.
And they started to post things.
Also, some tech founders out here started to post stuff on social media, write stuff about us in articles in the "LA Times," in "The Hollywood Reporter" and "Entertainment Weekly."
It was like this grassroots uprising of making ourselves news.
What an amazing thing to witness.
And the swell of support turned into this conversation online between all these Asian Americans where we could actually debate and discuss what stories we wanted to tell, what stories should be told or not, what kind of -- are we allowed to make fun of ourselves?
What about casting? What are we allowed to do?
And we didn't agree -- and we still don't, but that wasn't the point.
The point was the conversation was happening.
And this conversation stream became an infrastructure.
It took all these different groups that were trying to achieve the same thing and put us all together in this connective tissue.
And again, not perfect, but the start of how we determine our own representation on the big screen.
It became more physical when I went to the movie theater.
I'll never forget going -- opening weekend, and I went into the theater, and it's not just Asians -- all types of people -- and I go in and sit down, and people laughed, people cried, and when I went into the lobby, people stayed.
It's like they didn't want to leave.
They just hugged each other, high-fived each other, took selfies, they debated it, they laughed about it.
All these different things.
I had such an intimate relationship with this movie, but I didn't understand when we were making it what we were making until it was happening -- that it was the same thing that my parents felt when they watched our family videos in that living room that day.
Seeing us on the screen has a power to it, and the only way I can describe it is pride.
I have always understood this word intellectually -- I've probably talked about this word, but to actually feel pride -- and those of you who have felt it know -- it's like you just want to like, touch everybody and grab and run around.
It's like a very -- I can't explain -- it's just a very physical feeling, all because of a long pattern of connection.
Film was a gift given to me, and through the years I've learned a lot of things.
You can plan, you can write scripts, you can do your storyboards, but at a certain point, your movie will speak back to you, and it's your job to listen.
It's this living organism and it sort of presents itself, so you better catch it before it slips through your hands, and that's the most exciting part about making movies.
When I look at life, it's not that different actually.
I've been led through these sort of breadcrumbs of connections through people, through circumstances, through luck.
And it changed when I realized that once you start listening to the silent beats and the messy noises around you, you realize that there's this beautiful symphony already written for you.
A direct line to your destiny.
Your superpower.
Now, film was a gift given to me, sort of spurred on by my parents and supported by my community.
I got to be who I wanted to be when I needed to be it.
My mom posted something on Facebook the other day, which is usually a really bad thing to say out loud -- scary, she should not have a Facebook, but -- (Laughter) She posted this thing, and it was a meme, you know, one of those funny things, and it said, "You can't change someone who doesn't want to change, but never underestimate the power of planting a seed."
And as I was doing the finishing touches on this talk, I realized that all the powerful connections in my life were through generosity and kindness and love and hope.
So when I think about my movies "Crazy Rich Asians" and "In the Heights" which I'm working on right now -- (Applause and cheers) Yes, it's a good one.
All I want to do is show joy and hope in them, because I refuse to believe that our best days are behind us, but in fact, around the corner.
Because you see love -- love is the superpower that was given to me.
Love is the superpower that was passed onto me.
Love is the only thing that can stop a speeding bullet before it even exits the chamber.
Love is the only thing that can leap over a building and have a whole community look up into the sky, join hands, and have the courage to face something that's impossibly bigger than themselves.
So I have a challenge for myself and for anyone here.
As you're working on your thing, on your company, and you're forging this thing to life, and you're making the impossible possible, let's just not forget to be kind to each other, because I believe that is the most powerful form of connection we can give to this planet.
In fact, our future depends on it.
Thank you.
(Applause and cheers) Thank you.
(Applause)
One thing I wanted to say about film making is -- about this film -- in thinking about some of the wonderful talks we've heard here, Michael Moschen, and some of the talks about music, this idea that there is a narrative line, and that music exists in time.
A film also exists in time; it's an experience that you should go through emotionally.
And in making this film I felt that so many of the documentaries I've seen were all about learning something, or knowledge, or driven by talking heads, and driven by ideas.
And I wanted this film to be driven by emotions, and really to follow my journey.
So instead of doing the talking head thing, instead it's composed of scenes, and we meet people along the way.
We only meet them once.
They don't come back several times, so it really chronicles a journey.
It's something like life, that once you get in it you can't get out.
There are two clips I want to show you, the first one is a kind of hodgepodge, its just three little moments, four little moments with three of the people who are here tonight.
It's not the way they occur in the film, because they are part of much larger scenes.
They play off each other in a wonderful way.
And that ends with a little clip of my father, of Lou, talking about something that is very dear to him, which is the accidents of life.
I think he felt that the greatest things in life were accidental, and perhaps not planned at all.
And those three clips will be followed by a scene of perhaps what, to me, is really his greatest building which is a building in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
He built the capital over there.
And I think you'll enjoy this building, it's never been seen -- it's been still photographed, but never photographed by a film crew.
We were the first film crew in there.
So you'll see images of this remarkable building.
A couple of things to keep in mind when you see it, it was built entirely by hand, I think they got a crane the last year.
It was built entirely by hand off bamboo scaffolding, people carrying these baskets of concrete on their heads, dumping them in the forms.
It is the capital of the country, and it took 23 years to build, which is something they seem to be very proud of over there.
It took as long as the Taj Mahal.
Unfortunately it took so long that Lou never saw it finished.
He died in 1974.
The building was finished in 1983.
So it continued on for many years after he died.
Think about that when you see that building, that sometimes the things we strive for so hard in life we never get to see finished.
And that really struck me about my father, in the sense that he had such belief that somehow, doing these things giving in the way that he gave, that something good would come out of it, even in the middle of a war, there was a war with Pakistan at one point, and the construction stopped totally and he kept working, because he felt, "Well when the war is done they'll need this building."
So, those are the two clips I'm going to show.
Roll that tape.
(Applause) Richard Saul Wurman: I remember hearing him talk at Penn.
And I came home and I said to my father and mother, "I just met this man: doesn't have much work, and he's sort of ugly, funny voice, and he's a teacher at school.
I know you've never heard of him, but just mark this day that someday you will hear of him, because he's really an amazing man."
Frank Gehry: I heard he had some kind of a fling with Ingrid Bergman. Is that true?
Nathaniel Kahn: If he did he was a very lucky man.
(Laughter) NK: Did you hear that, really?
FG: Yeah, when he was in Rome.
Moshe Safdie: He was a real nomad.
And you know, when I knew him when I was in the office, he would come in from a trip, and he would be in the office for two or three days intensely, and he would pack up and go.
You know he'd be in the office till three in the morning working with us and there was this kind of sense of the nomad in him.
I mean as tragic as his death was in a railway station, it was so consistent with his life, you know?
I mean I often think I'm going to die in a plane, or I'm going to die in an airport, or die jogging without an identification on me.
I don't know why I sort of carry that from that memory of the way he died.
But he was a sort of a nomad at heart.
Louis Kahn: How accidental our existences are really and how full of influence by circumstance.
Man: We are the morning workers who come, all the time, here and enjoy the walking, city's beauty and the atmosphere and this is the nicest place of Bangladesh.
We are proud of it.
NK: You're proud of it?
Man: Yes, it is the national image of Bangladesh.
NK: Do you know anything about the architect?
Man: Architect? I've heard about him; he's a top-ranking architect.
NK: Well actually I'm here because I'm the architect's son, he was my father.
Man: Oh! Dad is Louis Farrakhan?
NK: Yeah. No not Louis Farrakhan, Louis Kahn.
Man: Louis Kahn, yes!
(Laughter) Man: Your father, is he alive?
NK: No, he's been dead for 25 years.
Man: Very pleased to welcome you back.
NK: Thank you.
NK: He never saw it finished, Pop.
No, he never saw this.
Shamsul Wares: It was almost impossible, building for a country like ours.
In 30, 50 years back, it was nothing, only paddy fields, and since we invited him here, he felt that he has got a responsibility.
He wanted to be a Moses here, he gave us democracy.
He is not a political man, but in this guise he has given us the institution for democracy, from where we can rise.
In that way it is so relevant.
He didn't care for how much money this country has, or whether he would be able to ever finish this building, but somehow he has been able to do it, build it, here.
And this is the largest project he has got in here, the poorest country in the world.
NK: It cost him his life.
SW: Yeah, he paid. He paid his life for this, and that is why he is great and we'll remember him.
But he was also human.
Now his failure to satisfy the family life, is an inevitable association of great people.
But I think his son will understand this, and will have no sense of grudge, or sense of being neglected, I think.
He cared in a very different manner, but it takes a lot of time to understand that.
In social aspect of his life he was just like a child, he was not at all matured.
He could not say no to anything, and that is why, that he cannot say no to things, we got this building today.
You see, only that way you can be able to understand him.
There is no other shortcut, no other way to really understand him.
But I think he has given us this building and we feel all the time for him, that's why, he has given love for us.
He could not probably give the right kind of love for you, but for us, he has given the people the right kind of love, that is important.
You have to understand that.
He had an enormous amount of love, he loved everybody.
To love everybody, he sometimes did not see the very closest ones, and that is inevitable for men of his stature.
(Applause)
In 2003, when we sequenced the human genome, we thought we would have the answer to treat many diseases.
But the reality is far from that, because in addition to our genes, our environment and lifestyle could have a significant role in developing many major diseases.
One example is fatty liver disease, which is affecting over 20 percent of the population globally, and it has no treatment and leads to liver cancer or liver failure.
So sequencing DNA alone doesn't give us enough information to find effective therapeutics.
On the bright side, there are many other molecules in our body.
In fact, there are over 100,000 metabolites.
Metabolites are any molecule that is supersmall in their size.
Known examples are glucose, fructose, fats, cholesterol -- things we hear all the time.
Metabolites are involved in our metabolism.
They are also downstream of DNA, so they carry information from both our genes as well as lifestyle.
Understanding metabolites is essential to find treatments for many diseases.
I've always wanted to treat patients.
Despite that, 15 years ago, I left medical school, as I missed mathematics.
Soon after, I found the coolest thing: I can use mathematics to study medicine.
Since then, I've been developing algorithms to analyze biological data.
So, it sounded easy: let's collect data from all the metabolites in our body, develop mathematical models to describe how they are changed in a disease and intervene in those changes to treat them.
Then I realized why no one has done this before: it's extremely difficult.
(Laughter) There are many metabolites in our body.
Each one is different from the other one.
For some metabolites, we can measure their molecular mass using mass spectrometry instruments.
But because there could be, like, 10 molecules with the exact same mass, we don't know exactly what they are, and if you want to clearly identify all of them, you have to do more experiments, which could take decades and billions of dollars.
So we developed an artificial intelligence, or AI, platform, to do that.
We leveraged the growth of biological data and built a database of any existing information about metabolites and their interactions with other molecules.
We combined all this data as a meganetwork.
Then, from tissues or blood of patients, we measure masses of metabolites and find the masses that are changed in a disease.
But, as I mentioned earlier, we don't know exactly what they are.
A molecular mass of 180 could be either the glucose, galactose or fructose.
They all have the exact same mass but different functions in our body.
Our AI algorithm considered all these ambiguities.
It then mined that meganetwork to find how those metabolic masses are connected to each other that result in disease.
And because of the way they are connected, then we are able to infer what each metabolite mass is, like that 180 could be glucose here, and, more importantly, to discover how changes in glucose and other metabolites lead to a disease.
This novel understanding of disease mechanisms then enable us to discover effective therapeutics to target that.
So we formed a start-up company to bring this technology to the market and impact people's lives.
Now my team and I at ReviveMed are working to discover therapeutics for major diseases that metabolites are key drivers for, like fatty liver disease, because it is caused by accumulation of fats, which are types of metabolites in the liver.
As I mentioned earlier, it's a huge epidemic with no treatment.
And fatty liver disease is just one example.
Moving forward, we are going to tackle hundreds of other diseases with no treatment.
And by collecting more and more data about metabolites and understanding how changes in metabolites leads to developing diseases, our algorithms will get smarter and smarter to discover the right therapeutics for the right patients.
And we will get closer to reach our vision of saving lives with every line of code.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Malaria is still one of the biggest killers on the planet.
Despite us making significant progress in the last 20 years, half the world's population is still at risk from this disease.
In fact, every two minutes, a child under the age of two dies from malaria.
Our progress has undoubtedly stalled.
Now we face many challenges when it comes to tackling malaria, but one of the problems that we have is actually finding people who are infected with malaria in the first place.
So, for example, if people have some level of immunity to the disease, then they can develop an infection and become infectious and still pass it on but not actually develop any symptoms, and that can be a big problem, because how do you find those people?
It's like looking for a needle in a haystack.
Now scientists have been trying to solve this problem for some years, but what I want to talk to you about today is that the solution to this problem may have been right under our noses this whole time.
Now that was a bit of a heavy start, with lots of really important statistics, so I want us all to just relax a little bit and that'll help me to relax a little bit as well.
So why don't we just all take a nice deep breath in ...
Wow. (Laughs) And sigh, and, whoo, going to get blown away there.
OK, now I want you to do it again, but this time, I want you to do it just through your nose, and I want you to really sense the environment around you.
And in fact, I want you to really smell the person who's sitting next to you.
Even if you don't know them, I don't care.
Lean in, get your nose right into their armpit, come on, stop being so British about it, get your nose into the armpit, have a good old sniff, see what you can smell.
(Laughter) Now each and every one of us would have had a very different sensory experience there.
Some of us would have smelled something rather pleasant, perhaps somebody's perfume.
But some of us might have smelled something a little bit less pleasant, perhaps somebody's bad breath or body odor.
Maybe you even smelled your own body odor.
(Laughter) But, you know, there's probably a good reason that some of us don't like certain body smells.
Throughout history, there have been many examples of diseases being associated with a smell.
So, for example, typhoid apparently smells like baked brown bread, and that's quite a nice smell, isn't it, but it starts to get a little bit worse.
TB smells like stale beer, and yellow fever smells like the inside of a butcher shop, like raw meat.
And in fact, when you look at the sort of words that are used to describe diseases, you tend to find these words: "rotting," "foul," "putrid" or "pungent."
So it's no surprise, then, that smell and body odor gets a bit of bad reputation.
If I was to say to you, "You smell," now, you're going to take that not exactly as a compliment, are you.
But you do smell.
It's a scientific fact.
And I'd quite like to turn that on its head.
What if we could actually think about smell in a positive way, put it to good use?
What if we could detect the chemicals that are given off by our bodies when we're ill, and use that to diagnose people?
Now we'd need to develop good sensors that would allow us to do this, but it turns out that the world's best sensors actually already exist, and they're called animals.
Now animals are built to smell.
They live their everyday lives according to their nose.
They sense the environment, which tells them really important information about how to stay alive, essentially.
Just imagine you're a mosquito and you've just flown in from outside and you've entered this room.
Now you're going to be entering a really complex world.
You're going to be bombarded with smells from everywhere.
We've just found out that we're really smelly beasts.
Each one of us is producing different volatile chemicals.
It's not just one chemical, like BO -- lots and lots of chemicals.
But it's not just you, it's the seats you're sitting on, the carpet, the glue that holds the carpet to the floor, the paint on the walls, the trees outside.
Everything around you is producing an odor, and it's a really complex world that the mosquito has to fly through, and it has to find you within that really complex world.
And each and every one of you will know -- Come on, hands up, who always gets bitten by mosquitoes?
And who never gets bitten?
There's always one or two really annoying people that never get bitten.
But the mosquito has a really hard job to find you, and that's all to do with the way you smell.
People who don't attract mosquitoes smell repellent, and what we know is that -- (Laughter) I should clarify, repellent to mosquitoes, not to people.
(Laughter) And what we know now is that that is actually controlled by our genes.
But mosquitoes are able to do that because they have a highly sophisticated sense of smell, and they're able to see through all the, sort of, odor sludge to find you, that individual, and bite you as a blood meal.
But what would happen if one of you was infected with malaria?
Well, let's just have a quick look at the malaria life cycle.
So it's quite complex, but basically, what happens is a mosquito has to bite somebody to become infected.
Once it bites an infected person, the parasite travels through the mouth part into the gut and then bursts through the gut, creates cysts, and then the parasites replicate, and then they make a journey from the gut all the way to the salivary glands, where they are then injected back into another person when the mosquito bites, because it injects saliva as it bites.
Then, inside the human, it goes through a whole other cycle, a whole other part of the life cycle, so it goes through a liver stage, changes shape, and then comes out into the bloodstream again, and eventually, that person will become infectious.
Now, one thing we know about the parasite world is that they are incredibly good at manipulating their hosts to enhance their own transmission, to make sure that they get passed onwards.
If this was to happen in the malaria system, it might make sense that it would be something to do with odor that they manipulate, because odor is the key.
Odor is the thing that links us between mosquitoes.
This is what we call the malaria manipulation hypothesis, and it's something that we've been working on over the last few years.
So one of the first things that we wanted to do in our study was to find out whether an infection with malaria actually makes you more attractive to mosquitoes or not.
So in Kenya, with our colleagues, we designed an experiment where we had participants, children in Kenya, sleep inside tents.
The odor from the tent was blown into a chamber which contained mosquitoes, and the mosquitoes would behaviorally respond.
They would fly towards or fly away from the odors, depending on whether they liked them or not.
Now some of the participants were infected with malaria, and some of them were uninfected, but importantly, none of the children had any symptoms whatsoever.
Now when we found and saw the results, it was really quite staggering.
People who were infected with malaria were significantly more attractive than people who were uninfected.
So let me explain this graph.
We have "number of mosquitoes attracted to the child," and we have two sets of data: before treatment and after treatment.
On the far left-hand side, that bar represents a group of people who are uninfected, and as we move towards the right-hand side, these people have become infected and they're moving towards the stage that they're infectious.
So right at the stage when people are infectious is when they are significantly more attractive.
In this study, then, what we did is we obviously gave the children treatment to clear the parasites, and then we tested them again, and what we found was that highly attractive trait that was there disappeared after they had cleared the infection.
So it wasn't just that the people were more attractive, it was that the parasite was manipulating its host in some way to make it more attractive to mosquitoes, standing out like a beacon to attract more mosquitoes so that it could continue its life cycle.
The next thing we wanted to do was find out what it was the mosquito was actually smelling.
So to do that, we had to collect the body odor from the participants, and we did this by wrapping bags around their feet, which allowed us to collect the volatile odors from their feet, and feet are really important to mosquitoes.
They really love the smell of feet.
(Laughter) Especially cheesy feet. Anybody got cheesy feet back there?
Mosquitoes love that smell.
So we focused on the feet, and we collected the body odor.
Now when it comes to mosquitoes and olfaction, their sense of smell, it's very complex.
It would be really nice if there was just one chemical that they detected, but it's not that simple.
They have to detect a number of chemicals in the right concentration, the right ratios, the right combinations of chemicals.
So you can sort of think about it like a musical composition.
So, you know, if you get the note wrong or you play it too loud or too soft, it doesn't sound right.
Or a recipe: if you get an ingredient wrong or you cook it too long or too little, it doesn't taste right.
Well, smell is the same.
It's made up of a suite of chemicals in the right combination.
Now our machines in the lab are not particularly good at picking out this sort of signal -- it's quite complex.
But animals can, and what we do in my laboratory is we connect microelectrodes to the antennae of a mosquito.
Imagine how fiddly that is.
(Laughter) But what we also do is connect them to individual cells within the antennae, which is incredible.
You don't want to sneeze when you're doing this, that's for sure.
But what this does is it allows us to measure the electrical response of the smell receptors in the antennae, and so we can see what a mosquito is smelling.
So I'm going to show you what this looks like.
Here's an insect's cell, and it will respond in a second when I press this button, and you'll see it sort of ticking over with this response.
An odor will be blown over the cell, and it will go a bit crazy, sort of blow a raspberry, and then it will go back to its resting potential when we stop the odor.
(Rapid crackling) (Low-pitch crackling) (Rapid crackling) OK, there we go, so you can go home now and say that you've seen an insect smelling and even hearing an insect smelling -- it's a weird concept, isn't it?
But this works really well, and this allows us to see what the insect is detecting.
Now using this method with our malaria samples, we were able to find out what the mosquito was detecting, and we found the malaria-associated compounds, mainly aldehydes, a group of compounds that smelled, that signified the malaria signal here.
So now we know what the smell of malaria is, and we've used the mosquito as a biosensor to tell us what the smell of malaria actually is.
Now I'd like to imagine that you could, I don't know, put a harness on a little mosquito and put it on a lead and take it out and see if we can sniff people in a community -- that goes on in my head -- and see whether we could actually find people with malaria, but, of course, that's not really possible.
But there is an animal that we can do that with.
Now dogs have an incredible sense of smell, but there's something more special about them: they have an ability to learn.
And most of you people will be familiar with this concept at airports, where dogs will go down a line and sniff out your luggage or yourself for drugs and explosives or even food as well.
So we wanted to know, could we actually train dogs to learn the smell of malaria?
And so we've been working with a charity called Medical Detection Dogs to see whether we can train them to learn the smell of malaria.
And we went out to the Gambia and did some more odor collection on children that were infected and uninfected, but this time, we collected their odor by making them wear socks, nylon stockings, to collect their body odor.
And we brought them back to the UK and then we handed them to this charity to run the experiment.
Now I could show you a graph and tell you about that experiment works, but that'd be a bit dull, wouldn't it.
Now, they do say never work with children or animals live, but we're going to break that rule today.
So please welcome onto the stage Freya ...
(Applause) and her trainers Mark and Sarah.
(Applause) Of course, this is the real star of the show.
(Laughter) OK, so now what I'm going to ask is if you can all just be a little bit quiet, not move around too much.
This is a very, very strange environment for Freya.
She's having a good look at you guys now.
So let's stay as calm as possible. That would be great.
So what we're going to do here is basically, we're going to ask Freya to move down this line of contraptions here, and in each one of these contraptions, we have a pot, and in the pot is a sock that has been worn by a child in the Gambia.
Now three of the socks have been worn by children who were uninfected, and just one of the socks was worn by a child who was infected with malaria.
So just as you would see an airport, imagine these were people, and the dog is going to go down and have a good sniff.
And let's see if you can see when she senses the malaria, and if she senses the malaria.
This is a really tough test for her in this very strange environment, so I'm going to hand it over now to Mark.
(Laughs) Number three. OK.
(Applause) There we go.
I didn't know which pot that was in. Mark didn't know.
This was a blind test, genuinely. Sarah, was that correct?
Sarah: Yes.
JL: That was correct. Well done, Freya. That is fantastic. Whew.
(Applause) That is really wonderful.
Now Sarah is going to actually change the pots around a little bit, and she's going to take the one with malaria away, and we're just going to have four pots that are containing socks from children that had no malaria, so in theory, Freya should go down the line and not stop at all.
And this is really important, because we also need to know people who are not infected, she needs to be able to do that.
And this is a tough test.
These socks have been in the freezer for a couple of years now, and this is a tiny bit of a sock as well.
So imagine if this was a whole person, giving off a big signal.
So this is really incredible.
OK, over to you, Mark.
(Laughs) (Applause) Brilliant. Fantastic.
(Applause) Really super. Thank you so much, guys.
Well done, guys.
(Applause) What a good girl. She's going to get a treat later.
Fantastic.
So you've just seen that for your own eyes.
That was a real live demonstration. I was quite nervous about it.
I'm so glad that it worked.
(Laughter) But it is really incredible, and when we do this, what we find is that these dogs can correctly tell us when somebody is infected with malaria 81 percent of the time.
It's incredible.
92 percent of the time, they can tell us correctly when somebody does not have an infection.
And those numbers are actually above the criteria set by the World Health Organization for a diagnostic.
So we really are looking at deploying dogs in countries, and particularly at ports of entry, to detect people who have malaria.
This could be a reality.
But we can't deploy dogs everywhere, and so what we're also looking to do and working on at the moment is the development of technology, wearable tech that would empower the individual to allow them to self-diagnose.
Imagine a patch that you wear on the skin that would detect in your sweat when you're infected with malaria and change color.
Or something a little more technical, perhaps: a smartwatch that would alert you when you're infected with malaria.
And if we can do this digitally, and we can collect data, imagine the amount of data that we can collect on a global scale.
This could completely revolutionize the way that we track the spread of diseases, the way that we target our control efforts and respond to disease outbreaks, ultimately helping to lead to the eradication of malaria, and even beyond malaria, for other diseases that we already know have a smell.
If we can harness the power of nature to find out what those smells are, we could do this and make this a reality.
Now, as scientists, we're tasked with coming up with new ideas, new concepts, new technologies to tackle some of the world's greatest problems, but what never ceases to amaze me is that often nature has already done this for us, and the answer ...
is right under our nose.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Before I get started: I'm really excited to be here to just actually watch what's going to happen, from here.
So with that said, we're going to start with: What is one of our greatest needs, one of our greatest needs for our brain?
And instead of telling you, I want to show you.
In fact, I want you to feel it.
There's a lot I want you to feel in the next 14 minutes.
So, if we could all stand up.
We're all going to conduct a piece of Strauss together.
Alright? And you all know it.
Alright. Are you ready?
Audience: Yeah!
Beau Lotto: Alright. Ready, one, two, three!
It's just the end.
(Music: Richard Strauss "Also Sprach Zarathustra") Right?
(Music) Oh, it's coming!
(Music stops abruptly) Oh!
(Laughter) Right?
Collective coitus interruptus.
OK, you can all sit down.
(Laughter) We have a fundamental need for closure.
(Laughter) We love closure.
(Applause) I was told the story that Mozart, just before he'd go to bed, he'd go to the piano and go, "da-da-da-da-da."
His father, who was already in bed, would think, "Argh."
He'd have to get up and hit the final note to the chord before he could go back to sleep.
(Laughter) So the need for closure leads us to thinking about: What is our greatest fear?
Think -- what is our greatest fear growing up, even now?
And it's the fear of the dark.
We hate uncertainty.
We hate to not know.
We hate it.
Think about horror films.
Horror films are always shot in the dark, in the forest, at night, in the depths of the sea, the blackness of space.
And the reason is because dying was easy during evolution.
If you weren't sure that was a predator, it was too late.
Your brain evolved to predict.
And if you couldn't predict, you died.
And the way your brain predicts is by encoding the bias and assumptions that were useful in the past.
But those assumptions just don't stay inside your brain.
You project them out into the world.
There is no bird there.
You're projecting the meaning onto the screen.
Everything I'm saying to you right now is literally meaningless.
(Laughter) You're creating the meaning and projecting it onto me.
And what's true for objects is true for other people.
While you can measure their "what" and their "when," you can never measure their "why."
So we color other people.
We project a meaning onto them based on our biases and our experience.
Which is why the best of design is almost always about decreasing uncertainty.
So when we step into uncertainty, our bodies respond physiologically and mentally.
Your immune system will start deteriorating.
Your brain cells wither and even die.
Your creativity and intelligence decrease.
We often go from fear to anger, almost too often.
Why? Because fear is a state of certainty.
You become morally judgmental.
You become an extreme version of yourself.
If you're a conservative, you become more conservative.
If you're a liberal, you become more liberal.
Because you go to a place of familiarity.
The problem is that the world changes.
And we have to adapt or die.
And if you want to shift from A to B, the first step is not B.
The first step is to go from A to not A -- to let go of your bias and assumptions; to step into the very place that our brain evolved to avoid; to step into the place of the unknown.
But it's so essential that we go to this place that our brain gave us a solution.
Evolution gave us a solution.
And it's possibly one of the most profound perceptual experiences.
And it's the experience of awe.
(Music) (Applause) (Music) (Applause) (Music) (Applause) (Music) (Applause) (Cheers) (Applause) Beau Lotto: Ah, how wonderful, right?
So right now, you're probably all feeling, at some level or another, awe.
So what's happening inside your brain right now?
And for thousands of years, we've been thinking and writing and experiencing awe, and we know so little about it.
And so to try to understand what is it and what does it do, my Lab of Misfits had just the wonderful opportunity and the pleasure to work with who are some of the greatest creators of awe that we know: the writers, the creators, the directors, the accountants, the people who are Cirque Du Soleil.
And so we went to Las Vegas, and we recorded the brain activity of people while they're watching the performance, over 10 performances of "O," which is iconic Cirque performance.
And we also measured the behavior before the performance, as well as a different group after the performance.
And so we had over 200 people involved.
So what is awe?
What is happening inside your brain right now?
It's a brain state. OK?
The front part of your brain, the prefrontal cortex, which is responsible for your executive function, your attentional control, is now being downregulated.
The part of your brain called the DMN, default mode network, which is the interaction between multiple areas in your brain, which is active during, sort of, ideation, creative thinking in terms of divergent thinking and daydreaming, is now being upregulated.
And right about now, the activity in your prefrontal cortex is changing.
It's becoming asymmetrical in its activity, biased towards the right, which is highly correlated when people step forward into the world, as opposed to step back.
In fact, the activity across the brains of all these people was so correlated that we're able to train an artificial neural network to predict whether or not people are experiencing awe to an accuracy of 75 percent on average, with a maximum of 83 percent.
So what does this brain state do?
Well, others have demonstrated, for instance, Professors Haidt and Keltner, have told us that people feel small but connected to the world.
And their prosocial behavior increases, because they feel an increased affinity towards others.
And we've also shown in this study that people have less need for cognitive control.
They're more comfortable with uncertainty without having closure.
And their appetite for risk also increases.
They actually seek risk, and they are better able at taking it.
And something that was really quite profound is that when we asked people, "Are you someone who has a propensity to experience awe?"
They were more likely to give a positive response after the performance than they were [before].
They literally redefined themselves and their history.
So, awe is possibly the perception that is bigger than us.
And in the words of Joseph Campbell, "Awe is what enables us to move forward."
Or in the words of a dear friend, probably one of our greatest photographers, still living photographers, Duane Michaels, he said to me just the other day that maybe it gives us the curiosity to overcome our cowardice.
So who cares? Why should we care?
Well, consider conflict, which seems to be so omnipresent in our society at the moment.
If you and I are in conflict, it's as if we're at the opposite ends of the same line.
And my aim is to prove that you're wrong and to shift you towards me.
The problem is, you are doing exactly the same.
You're trying to prove that I'm wrong and shift me towards you.
Notice that conflict is the setup to win but not learn.
Your brain only learns if we move.
Life is movement.
So, what if we could use awe, not to get rid of conflict -- conflict is essential, conflict is how your brain expands, it's how your brain learns -- but rather, to enter conflict in a different way?
And what if awe could enable us to enter it in at least two different ways?
One, to give us the humility and courage to not know.
Right? To enter conflict with a question instead of an answer.
What would happen then?
To enter the conflict with uncertainty instead of certainty.
And the second is, in entering conflict that way, to seek to understand, rather than convince.
Because everyone makes sense to themselves, right?
And to understand another person, is to understand the biases and assumptions that give rise to their behavior.
And we've actually initiated a pilot study to look to see whether we could use art-induced awe to facilitate toleration.
And the results are actually incredibly positive.
We can mitigate against anger and hate through the experience of awe generated by art.
So where can we find awe, given how important it is?
So, what if ...
A suggestion: that awe is not just to be found in the grandeur.
Awe is essential.
Often, it's scale -- the mountains, the sunscape.
But what if we could actually rescale ourselves and find the impossible in the simple?
And if this is true, and our data are right, then endeavors like science, adventure, art, ideas, love, a TED conference, performance, are not only inspired by awe, but could actually be our ladders into uncertainty to help us expand.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Please, come up.
(Applause) (Cheers) (Applause)
Scientists work on the boundaries of the unknown, where every new piece of knowledge forms a path into a void of uncertainty.
And nothing is more uncertain or potentially enlightening than a paradox.
Throughout history, paradoxes have threatened to undermine everything we know, and just as often, theyve reshaped our understanding of the world.
Today, one of the biggest paradoxes in the universe threatens to unravel the fields of general relativity and quantum mechanics: the black hole information paradox.
To understand this paradox, we first need to define what we mean by "information."
Typically, the information we talk about is visible to the naked eye.
For example, this kind of information tells us that an apple is red, round, and shiny.
But physicists are more concerned with quantum information.
This refers to the quantum properties of all the particles that make up that apple, such as their position, velocity and spin.
Every object in the universe is composed of particles with unique quantum properties.
This idea is evoked most significantly in a vital law of physics: the total amount of quantum information in the Universe must be conserved.
Even if you destroy an object beyond recognition, its quantum information is never permanently deleted.
And theoretically, knowledge of that information would allow us to recreate the object from its particle components.
Conservation of information isnt just an arbitrary rule, but a mathematical necessity, upon which much of modern science is built.
But around black holes, those foundations get shaken.
When an apple enters a black hole, it seems as though it leaves the universe, and all its quantum information becomes irretrievably lost.
However, this doesnt immediately break the laws of physics.
The information is out of sight, but it might still exist within the black holes mysterious void.
Alternatively, some theories suggest that information doesnt even make it inside the black hole at all.
Seen from outside, its as if the apples quantum information is encoded on the surface layer of the black hole, called the event horizon.
As the black holes mass increases, the surface of the event horizon increases as well.
So its possible that as a black hole swallows an object, it also grows large enough to conserve the objects quantum information.
But whether information is conserved inside the black hole or on its surface, the laws of physics remain intact until you account for Hawking Radiation.
Discovered by Stephen Hawking in 1974, this phenomenon shows that black holes are gradually evaporating.
Over incredibly long periods of time black holes lose mass as they shed particles away from their event horizons.
Critically, it seems as though the evaporating particles are unrelated to the information the black hole encodes suggesting that a black hole and all the quantum information it contains could be completely erased.
Does that quantum information truly disappear?
If not, where does it go?
While the evaporation process would take an incredibly long time, the questions it raises for physics are far more urgent.
The destruction of information would force us to rewrite some of our most fundamental scientific paradigms.
But fortunately, in science, every paradox is an opportunity for new discoveries.
Researchers are investigating a broad range of possible solutions to the Information Paradox.
Some have theorized that information actually is encoded in the escaping radiation, in some way we cant yet understand.
Others have suggested the paradox is just a misunderstanding of how general relativity and quantum field theory interact.
Respectively, these two theories describe the largest and smallest physical phenomena, and theyre notoriously difficult to combine.
Some researchers argue that a solution to this and many other paradoxes will come naturally with a unified theory of everything. But perhaps the most mind-bending theory to come from exploring this paradox is the holographic principle.
Expanding on the idea that the 2D surface of an event horizon can store quantum information, this principle suggests that the very boundary of the observable universe is also a 2D surface encoded with information about real, 3D objects.
If this is true, its possible that reality as we know it is just a holographic projection of that information.
If proven, any of these theories would open up new questions to explore, while still preserving our current models of the universe.
But its also possible that those models are wrong!
Either way, this paradox has already helped us take another step into the unknown.
What I'm going to try to do is explain to you quickly how to predict, and illustrate it with some predictions about what Iran is going to do in the next couple of years.
In order to predict effectively, we need to use science.
And the reason that we need to use science is because then we can reproduce what we're doing; it's not just wisdom or guesswork.
And if we can predict, then we can engineer the future.
So if you are concerned to influence energy policy, or you are concerned to influence national security policy, or health policy, or education, science -- and a particular branch of science -- is a way to do it, not the way we've been doing it, which is seat-of-the-pants wisdom.
Now before I get into how to do it let me give you a little truth in advertising, because I'm not engaged in the business of magic.
There are lots of thing that the approach I take can predict, and there are some that it can't.
It can predict complex negotiations or situations involving coercion -- that is in essence everything that has to do with politics, much of what has to do with business, but sorry, if you're looking to speculate in the stock market, I don't predict stock markets -- OK, it's not going up any time really soon.
But I'm not engaged in doing that.
I'm not engaged in predicting random number generators.
I actually get phone calls from people who want to know what lottery numbers are going to win.
I don't have a clue.
I engage in the use of game theory, game theory is a branch of mathematics and that means, sorry, that even in the study of politics, math has come into the picture.
We can no longer pretend that we just speculate about politics, we need to look at this in a rigorous way.
Now, what is game theory about?
It assumes that people are looking out for what's good for them.
That doesn't seem terribly shocking -- although it's controversial for a lot of people -- that we are self-interested.
In order to look out for what's best for them or what they think is best for them, people have values -- they identify what they want, and what they don't want.
And they have beliefs about what other people want, and what other people don't want, how much power other people have, how much those people could get in the way of whatever it is that you want.
And they face limitations, constraints, they may be weak, they may be located in the wrong part of the world, they may be Einstein, stuck away farming someplace in a rural village in India not being noticed, as was the case for Ramanujan for a long time, a great mathematician but nobody noticed.
Now who is rational?
A lot of people are worried about what is rationality about?
You know, what if people are rational?
Mother Theresa, she was rational.
Terrorists, they're rational.
Pretty much everybody is rational.
I think there are only two exceptions that I'm aware of -- two-year-olds, they are not rational, they have very fickle preferences, they switch what they think all the time, and schizophrenics are probably not rational, but pretty much everybody else is rational.
That is, they are just trying to do what they think is in their own best interest.
Now in order to work out what people are going to do to pursue their interests, we have to think about who has influence in the world.
If you're trying to influence corporations to change their behavior, with regard to producing pollutants, one approach, the common approach, is to exhort them to be better, to explain to them what damage they're doing to the planet.
And many of you may have noticed that doesn't have as big an effect, as perhaps you would like it to have.
But if you show them that it's in their interest, then they're responsive.
So, we have to work out who influences problems.
If we're looking at Iran, the president of the United States we would like to think, may have some influence -- certainly the president in Iran has some influence -- but we make a mistake if we just pay attention to the person at the top of the power ladder because that person doesn't know much about Iran, or about energy policy, or about health care, or about any particular policy.
That person surrounds himself or herself with advisers.
If we're talking about national security problems, maybe it's the Secretary of State, maybe it's the Secretary of Defense, the Director of National Intelligence, maybe the ambassador to the United Nations, or somebody else who they think is going to know more about the particular problem.
But let's face it, the Secretary of State doesn't know much about Iran.
The secretary of defense doesn't know much about Iran.
Each of those people in turn has advisers who advise them, so they can advise the president.
There are lots of people shaping decisions and so if we want to predict correctly we have to pay attention to everybody who is trying to shape the outcome, not just the people at the pinnacle of the decision-making pyramid.
Unfortunately, a lot of times we don't do that.
There's a good reason that we don't do that, and there's a good reason that using game theory and computers, we can overcome the limitation of just looking at a few people.
Imagine a problem with just five decision-makers.
Imagine for example that Sally over here, wants to know what Harry, and Jane, and George and Frank are thinking, and sends messages to those people.
Sally's giving her opinion to them, and they're giving their opinion to Sally.
But Sally also wants to know what Harry is saying to these three, and what they're saying to Harry.
And Harry wants to know what each of those people are saying to each other, and so on, and Sally would like to know what Harry thinks those people are saying.
That's a complicated problem; that's a lot to know.
With five decision-makers there are a lot of linkages -- 120, as a matter of fact, if you remember your factorials.
Five factorial is 120.
Now you may be surprised to know that smart people can keep 120 things straight in their head.
Suppose we double the number of influencers from five to 10.
Does that mean we've doubled the number of pieces of information we need to know, from 120 to 240?
No. How about 10 times?
To 1,200? No.
We've increased it to 3.6 million.
Nobody can keep that straight in their head.
But computers, they can. They don't need coffee breaks, they don't need vacations, they don't need to go to sleep at night, they don't ask for raises either.
They can keep this information straight and that means that we can process the information.
So I'm going to talk to you about how to process it, and I'm going to give you some examples out of Iran, and you're going to be wondering, "Why should we listen to this guy?
Why should we believe what he's saying?"
So I'm going to show you a factoid.
This is an assessment by the Central Intelligence Agency of the percentage of time that the model I'm talking about is right in predicting things whose outcome is not yet known, when the experts who provided the data inputs got it wrong.
That's not my claim, that's a CIA claim -- you can read it, it was declassified a while ago. You can read it in a volume edited by H. Bradford Westerfield, Yale University Press.
So, what do we need to know in order to predict?
You may be surprised to find out we don't need to know very much.
We do need to know who has a stake in trying to shape the outcome of a decision.
We need to know what they say they want, not what they want in their heart of hearts, not what they think they can get, but what they say they want, because that is a strategically chosen position, and we can work backwards from that to draw inferences about important features of their decision-making.
We need to know how focused they are on the problem at hand.
That is, how willing are they to drop what they're doing when the issue comes up, and attend to it instead of something else that's on their plate -- how big a deal is it to them?
And how much clout could they bring to bear if they chose to engage on the issue?
If we know those things we can predict their behavior by assuming that everybody cares about two things on any decision.
They care about the outcome. They'd like an outcome as close to what they are interested in as possible.
They're careerists, they also care about getting credit -- there's ego involvement, they want to be seen as important in shaping the outcome, or as important, if it's their druthers, to block an outcome.
And so we have to figure out how they balance those two things.
Different people trade off between standing by their outcome, faithfully holding to it, going down in a blaze of glory, or giving it up, putting their finger in the wind, and doing whatever they think is going to be a winning position.
Most people fall in between, and if we can work out where they fall we can work out how to negotiate with them to change their behavior.
So with just that little bit of input we can work out what the choices are that people have, what the chances are that they're willing to take, what they're after, what they value, what they want, and what they believe about other people.
You might notice what we don't need to know: there's no history in here.
How they got to where they are may be important in shaping the input information, but once we know where they are we're worried about where they're going to be headed in the future.
How they got there turns out not to be terribly critical in predicting.
I remind you of that 90 percent accuracy rate.
So where are we going to get this information?
We can get this information from the Internet, from The Economist, The Financial Times, The New York Times, U.S. News and World Report, lots of sources like that, or we can get it from asking experts who spend their lives studying places and problems, because those experts know this information.
If they don't know, who are the people trying to influence the decision, how much clout do they have, how much they care about this issue, and what do they say they want, are they experts? That's what it means to be an expert, that's the basic stuff an expert needs to know.
Alright, lets turn to Iran.
Let me make three important predictions -- you can check this out, time will tell.
What is Iran going to do about its nuclear weapons program?
How secure is the theocratic regime in Iran?
What's its future?
And everybody's best friend, Ahmadinejad. How are things going for him?
How are things going to be working out for him in the next year or two?
You take a look at this, this is not based on statistics.
I want to be very clear here. I'm not projecting some past data into the future.
I've taken inputs on positions and so forth, run it through a computer model that had simulated the dynamics of interaction, and these are the simulated dynamics, the predictions about the path of policy.
So you can see here on the vertical axis, I haven't shown it all the way down to zero, there are lots of other options, but here I'm just showing you the prediction, so I've narrowed the scale.
Up at the top of the axis, "Build the Bomb."
At 130, we start somewhere above 130, between building a bomb, and making enough weapons-grade fuel so that you could build a bomb.
That's where, according to my analyses, the Iranians were at the beginning of this year.
And then the model makes predictions down the road.
At 115 they would only produce enough weapons grade fuel to show that they know how, but they wouldn't build a weapon: they would build a research quantity.
It would achieve some national pride, but not go ahead and build a weapon.
And down at 100 they would build civilian nuclear energy, which is what they say is their objective.
The yellow line shows us the most likely path.
The yellow line includes an analysis of 87 decision makers in Iran, and a vast number of outside influencers trying to pressure Iran into changing its behavior, various players in the United States, and Egypt, and Saudi Arabia, and Russia, European Union, Japan, so on and so forth.
The white line reproduces the analysis if the international environment just left Iran to make its own internal decisions, under its own domestic political pressures.
That's not going to be happening, but you can see that the line comes down faster if they're not put under international pressure, if they're allowed to pursue their own devices.
But in any event, by the end of this year, beginning of next year, we get to a stable equilibrium outcome.
And that equilibrium is not what the United States would like, but it's probably an equilibrium that the United States can live with, and that a lot of others can live with.
And that is that Iran will achieve that nationalist pride by making enough weapons-grade fuel, through research, so that they could show that they know how to make weapons-grade fuel, but not enough to actually build a bomb.
How is this happening?
Over here you can see this is the distribution of power in favor of civilian nuclear energy today, this is what that power block is predicted to be like by the late parts of 2010, early parts of 2011.
Just about nobody supports research on weapons-grade fuel today, but by 2011 that gets to be a big block, and you put these two together, that's the controlling influence in Iran.
Out here today, there are a bunch of people -- Ahmadinejad for example -- who would like not only to build a bomb, but test a bomb.
That power disappears completely; nobody supports that by 2011.
These guys are all shrinking, the power is all drifting out here, so the outcome is going to be the weapons-grade fuel.
Who are the winners and who are the losers in Iran?
Take a look at these guys, they're growing in power, and by the way, this was done a while ago before the current economic crisis, and that's probably going to get steeper.
These folks are the moneyed interests in Iran, the bankers, the oil people, the bazaaries.
They are growing in political clout, as the mullahs are isolating themselves -- with the exception of one group of mullahs, who are not well known to Americans.
That's this line here, growing in power, these are what the Iranians call the quietists.
These are the Ayatollahs, mostly based in Qom, who have great clout in the religious community, have been quiet on politics and are going to be getting louder, because they see Iran going in an unhealthy direction, a direction contrary to what Khomeini had in mind.
Here is Mr. Ahmadinejad.
Two things to notice: he's getting weaker, and while he gets a lot of attention in the United States, he is not a major player in Iran.
He is on the way down.
OK, so I'd like you to take a little away from this.
Everything is not predictable: the stock market is, at least for me, not predictable, but most complicated negotiations are predictable.
Again, whether we're talking health policy, education, environment, energy, litigation, mergers, all of these are complicated problems that are predictable, that this sort of technology can be applied to.
And the reason that being able to predict those things is important, is not just because you might run a hedge fund and make money off of it, but because if you can predict what people will do, you can engineer what they will do.
And if you engineer what they do you can change the world, you can get a better result.
I would like to leave you with one thought, which is for me, the dominant theme of this gathering, and is the dominant theme of this way of thinking about the world.
When people say to you, "That's impossible," you say back to them, "When you say 'That's impossible,' you're confused with, 'I don't know how to do it.'" Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: One question for you.
That was fascinating.
I love that you put it out there.
I got very nervous halfway through the talk though, just panicking whether you'd included in your model, the possibility that putting this prediction out there might change the result.
We've got 800 people in Tehran who watch TEDTalks.
Bruce Bueno de Mesquita: I've thought about that, and since I've done a lot of work for the intelligence community, they've also pondered that.
It would be a good thing if people paid more attention, took seriously, and engaged in the same sorts of calculations, because it would change things. But it would change things in two beneficial ways.
It would hasten how quickly people arrive at an agreement, and so it would save everybody a lot of grief and time.
And, it would arrive at an agreement that everybody was happy with, without having to manipulate them so much -- which is basically what I do, I manipulate them.
So it would be a good thing.
CA: So you're kind of trying to say, "People of Iran, this is your destiny, lets go there."
BBM: Well, people of Iran, this is what many of you are going to evolve to want, and we could get there a lot sooner, and you would suffer a lot less trouble from economic sanctions, and we would suffer a lot less fear of the use of military force on our end, and the world would be a better place.
CA: Here's hoping they hear it that way. Thank you very much Bruce.
BBM: Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm from Detroit.
(Applause) A city that in the 1950s was the world's industrial giant, with a population of 1.8 million people and 140 square miles of land and infrastructure, used to support this booming, Midwestern urban center.
And now today, just a half a century later, Detroit is the poster child for urban decay.
Currently in Detroit, our population is under 700,000, of which 84 percent are African American, and due to decades of disinvestment and capital flight from the city into the suburbs, there is a scarcity in Detroit.
There is a scarcity of retail, more specifically, fresh food retail, resulting in a city where 70 percent of Detroiters are obese and overweight, and they struggle.
They struggle to access nutritious food that they need, that they need to stay healthy, that they need to prevent premature illness and diet-related diseases.
Far too many Detroiters live closer to a fast food restaurant or to a convenience store, or to a gas station where they have to shop for food than they do a full-service supermarket.
And this is not good news about the city of Detroit, but this is the news and the story that Detroiters intend to change.
No, I'm going to take that back.
This is the story that Detroiters are changing, through urban agriculture and food entrepreneurship.
Here's the thing: because of Detroit's recent history, it now finds itself with some very unique assets, open land being one of them.
Experts say that the entire cities of Boston, San Francisco, and the borough of Manhattan will fit in the land area of the city of Detroit.
They further go on to say that 40 square miles of the city is vacant.
That's a quarter to a third of the city, and with that level of emptiness, it creates a landscape unlike any other big city.
So Detroit has this -- open land, fertile soil, proximity to water, willing labor and a desperate demand for healthy, fresh food.
All of this has created a people-powered grassroots movement of people in Detroit who are transforming this city from what was the capital of American industry into an agrarian paradise.
(Applause) You know, I think, out of all the cities in the world, Detroit, Michigan, is best positioned to serve as the world's urban exemplar of food security and sustainable development.
In Detroit, we have over 1,500, yes, 1,500 gardens and farms located all across the city today.
And these aren't plots of land where we're just growing tomatoes and carrots either.
You understand, urban agriculture in Detroit is all about community, because we grow together.
So these spaces are spaces of conviviality.
These spaces are places where we're building social cohesion as well as providing healthy, fresh food to our friends, our families and our neighbors.
Come walk with me.
I want to take you through a few Detroit neighborhoods, and I want you to see what it looks like when you empower local leadership, and when you support grassroots movements of folks who are moving the needle in low-income communities and people of color.
Our first stop, Oakland Avenue Farms.
Oakland Avenue Farms is located in Detroit's North End neighborhood.
Oakland Avenue Farms is transforming into a five-acre landscape combining art, architecture, sustainable ecologies and new market practices.
In the truest sense of the word, this is what agriculture looks like in the city of Detroit.
I've had the opportunity to work with Oakland Avenue Farms in hosting Detroit-grown and made farm-to-table dinners.
These are dinners where we bring folks onto the farm, we give them plenty of time and opportunity to meet and greet and talk to the grower, and then they're taken on a farm tour.
And then afterwards, they're treated to a farm-to-table meal prepared by a chef who showcases all the produce on the farm right at the peak of its freshness.
We do that.
We bring people onto the farm, we have folks sitting around a table, because we want to change people's relationship to food.
We want them to know exactly where their food comes from that is grown on that farm that's on the plate.
My second stop, I'm going to take you on the west side of Detroit, to the Brightmoor neighborhood.
Now, Brightmoor is a lower-income community in Detroit.
There's about 13,000 residents in Brightmoor.
They decided to take a block-by-block-by-block strategy.
So within the neighborhood of Brightmoor, you'll find a 21-block microneighborhood called Brightmoor Farmway.
Now, what was a notorious, unsafe, underserved community has transformed into a welcoming, beautiful, safe farmway, lush with parks and gardens and farms and greenhouses.
This tight-knit community also came together recently, and they purchased an abandoned building, an abandoned building that was in disrepair and in foreclosure.
And with the help of friends and families and volunteers, they were able to take down the bulletproof glass, they were able to clean up the grounds and they transformed that building into a community kitchen, into a cafe, into a storefront.
Now the farmers and the food artisans who live in Brightmoor, they have a place where they can make and sell their product.
And the people in the community have some place where they can buy healthy, fresh food.
Urban agriculture -- and this is my third example -- can be used as a way to lift up the business cooperative model.
The 1,500 farms and gardens I told you about earlier?
Keep Growing Detroit is a nonprofit organization that had a lot to do with those farms.
They distributed last year 70,000 packets of seeds and a quarter of a million transplants, and as a result of that last year, 550,000 pounds of produce was grown in the city of Detroit.
(Applause) But aside from all of that, they also manage and operate a cooperative.
It's called Grown in Detroit.
It consists of about 70 farmers, small farmers.
They all grow, and they sell together.
They grow fruits, they grow vegetables, they grow flowers, they grow herbs in healthy soil, free of chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers, genetically modified products -- healthy food.
And when their product is sold all over the city of Detroit in local markets, they get a hundred percent of the proceeds from the sale.
In a city like Detroit, where far too many, far too many African Americans are dying as a result of diet-related diseases, restaurants, they have a huge role to play in increasing healthy food access in the city of Detroit, culturally appropriate restaurants.
Enter Detroit Vegan Soul.
Yes, we have a vegan soul food restaurant in the city of Detroit.
(Applause) Yes, yes.
Detroit Vegan Soul is providing Detroiters the opportunity to eat more plant-based meals and they've received an overwhelming response from Detroiters.
Detroiters are hungry for culturally appropriate, fresh, delicious food.
That's why we built a nonprofit organization called FoodLab Detroit, to help small neighborhood burgeoning food entrepreneurs start and scale healthy food businesses.
FoodLab provides these entrepreneurs incubation, hands-on education, workshops, technical assistance, access to industry experts so that they can grow and scale.
They're very small businesses, but last year, they had a combined revenue of over 7.5 million dollars, and they provided 252 jobs.
Listen.
(Applause) These are just a few examples on how you expand opportunities so that everybody can participate and prosper, particularly those who come from neighborhoods that have been historically excluded from these types of opportunities.
I know, I know.
My city is a long way from succeeding.
We're still struggling, and I'm not going to stand here on this stage and tell you that all of Detroit's problems and all of Detroit's challenges are going to be solved through urban agriculture.
I'm not going to do that, but I will tell you this: urban agriculture has Detroit thinking about its city now in a different way, a city that can be both urban and rural.
And yes, I know, these stories are small, these stories are neighborhood-based stories, but these stories are powerful.
They're powerful because I'm showing you how we're creating a new society left vacant in the places and the spaces that was disintegration from the old.
They're powerful stories because they're stories about love, the love that Detroiters have for one another, the love that we have for our community, the love that we have for Mother Earth, but more importantly, these stories are stories on how devastation, despair, decay never ever get the last word in the city of Detroit.
When hundreds of thousands of people left Detroit, and they left us for dead, those who stayed had hope.
They held on to hope.
They never gave up.
They always kept fighting.
And listen, I know, transforming a big city like Detroit to one that is prosperous, one that's functional, one that's healthy, one that's inclusive, one that provides opportunities for all, I know it's tough, I know it's challenging, I know it's hard.
But I just believe that if we start strengthening the social fabric of our communities, and if we kickstart economic opportunities in our most vulnerable neighborhoods, it all starts with healthy, accessible, delicious, culturally appropriate food.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
After breaking Ethic out of prison, Hedge flies them both towards a frontier settlement in the shadow of the Bradbarrier, the great wall that encircles the nation.
All the settlers there will soon gather for the monthly feeding.
The people of the wall spend their days gathering up works of art and literature, from all across the land.
On feeding day, the furnace-bots arrive, ravenous.
If they eat, the lights stay on, and the food gets delivered.
If they starve, the people do too.
Hedges fuel supply runs out just as he and Ethic reach the outskirts of town, and they come in for a crash landing.
Luckily, everyone is too busy preparing for the feeding to notice.
Todays feeding is where Ethic can find the leader of an underground resistance movement.
This person knows the location of the first of three powerful artifacts.
The problem is, Hedge and Ethic dont know the resistance leaders name or appearance.
But Hedge has gathered the following information: The leader has green eyes.
If the leader has red hair, their name has at least one consecutive double letter.
If the leader wear glasses, their name has exactly 2 vowels.
Otherwise, their name has exactly 3 vowels.
There is exactly one person for whom these are all true.
As a fugitive, Ethic cant sneak into the crowd without drawing attention to herself.
But she can give instructions to Hedge.
And one tool she has is what programmers call a conditional.
Thats a statement of the form If A, then B. Flowcharts are great illustrations of how those work.
This conditional translates to: if A is true, carry out instruction B.
There are also conditionals that account for different possibilities.
This says, If A is true, perform instruction B.
Otherwise, carry out instruction C. So what instructions does she give Hedge so he can find the resistance leader?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
With a problem like this, it can help to simplify first.
What if Hedge just has to examine this one person?
What information does he need to collect about her?
He might ask, Does she have green eyes? What other questions should Hedge ask to find the resistance leader, and how can he track those answers?
Pause now to figure it out for yourself.
It may seem intuitive how youd approach this problem as a human.
But Hedge isnt a human, and so the challenge comes from needing to give him systematic instructions that will work in any scenario.
Hedge needs to examine the settlers, one at a time, until he discovers the right person.
In other words, like with the lock on the prison cell, this is a loop that repeats the same instructions.
Only this time the loop will involve a series of questions in the form of conditionals, and will end as soon as Hedge finds his target.
But first, youll want to organize your information.
Each person has a set of characteristics: Eye color, hair color, glasses, and name.
Does this person have green eyes?
If so, mark a check next to eye color." If not, mark an X there.
If they have red hair, does their name contain a double letter?
If so, mark a check next to hair color. If they dont have a double letter, mark an X next to hair color. Anyone with red hair and no double letter cant be the resistance leader.
But notice that if they have blue hair, Hedge will skip this question and go on to the next one.
For the last question, we can say, If they wear glasses, does their name have exactly 2 vowels?
If they dont have glasses, does their name have exactly 3 vowels? There will be people in the crowd with glasses and 1 vowel, or no glasses and 2 vowels.
But theyre not who were looking for, so theyll get Xs.
The resistance leader must be someone with either check marks or blanks next to every question.
Blanks are ok, because if someone has blue hair, the rule about red hair doesnt apply to them.
You could have Hedge ask every question about every person, and then choose the person with only checks and blanks.
But theres a way to save yourself lots of time: as soon as Hedge marks an X, have him move on to the next person.
You dont need to know the answer to every question; just one X means theyre not the target of your search.
Hedge buzzes through the crowd, and within minutes finds Adila, the resistance leader, and brings her back to Ethic.
Adila agrees to help them steal the first artifact the node of power but under one condition: that Ethic and Hedge jump-start the revolution by reprogramming the furnace-bots that terrorize the town.
And right on cue, the robots descend.
Chak Ek rose from the underworld to the surface of the eastern sea and on into the heavens.
His brother Kin Ahaw followed.
Though Chak Ek had risen first, Kin Ahaw outshone him, and the resentful Chak Ek descended back to the underworld to plot against his brother.
In Mayan mythology, Chak Ek represents Venus and Kin Ahaw represents the sun.
Known as both the morning and the evening star, Venus moves through the sky, sometimes visible before sunrise, sometimes after sunset, and occasionally not at all.
The ancient Maya identified this roughly 584 day cycle more than a thousand years ago and it still accurately predicts when and where Venus will appear in the sky around the world.
Five of these cycles make up almost exactly eight years, and the Maya also recognized this larger cycle.
They assigned Chak Ek five different forms, one for each cycle of Venus, that were repeated every eight years.
Within the 584 day cycle, Venus is visible in the evening sky for 250 days, then disappears for 8 days before reappearing as the Morning Star.
The ancient Maya ascribed particular significance to this point in this cycle: the first time Venus appears before sunrise after being invisible.
On this day, Chak Ek rose again from the underworld, wielding a spearthrower and darts.
To bring discord to the world, he decided to attack his brother and his brothers allies.
His first target was Kawiil, god of sustenance and lightning.
Rising in the late rainy season, Chak Ek aimed his spear and struck Kawiil, causing damage to the food and a period of chaos in the social order until Kawiil was reborn.
584 days after attacking Kawiil, Chak Ek turned his attention back to his brother, the Sun.
Each night, the Sun took the form of jaguar and journeyed through the underworld.
Chak Ek speared the jaguar sun as it rose at dawn towards the end of the dry season.
The Sun was wounded, plunging the world into a period of chaos and warfare.
Chak Eks third victim was the god of maize, who provided sustenance for all humankind.
Chak Ek speared him at the time of the harvest.
He was buried in the underworld, and maizethe staple of life was no longer available to Earths inhabitants.
But the maize god emerged after three months in the place of new beginnings the eastern cave known as Seven Water Place bringing food once again to earth.
When the turtle Ak Na'ak rose in the sky to mark the summer solstice, Chak Ek claimed his fourth victim.
With the death of this good omen, the Sun, the food supply, and the people were buried within the earth, and the forces of chaos reigned.
But out of the chaos rose a new order established by Hun Ajaw, one of the hero twins known to all for having vanquished the lords of the underworld.
A new race of humans was created, made from maize.
This state of balance was not to last, however.
Chak Eks fifth and final victim was a mysterious stranger from the west, and his death in the heart of the dry season shook the order established by Hun Ajaw.
The gods, the lords, and the maize were buried in the underworld.
But this victory for Chak Ek would also prove temporary.
The two brothers, Venus and the Sun, were caught in an endless cycle as they battled for supremacy, re-enacting the same five struggles, while the world alternated between order and chaos with the rising of the Morning Star.
It's April of 2007, and Jon Corzine, the Governor of New Jersey, is in this horrific car accident.
He's in the right front passenger seat of this SUV when it crashes on the Garden State Parkway.
He's transported to a New Jersey trauma center with multiple broken bones and multiple lacerations.
He needs immediate surgery, seven units of blood, a mechanical ventilator to help him breathe and several more operations along the way.
It's amazing he survived.
But perhaps even more amazing, he was not wearing a seat belt.
And, in fact, he never wore a seat belt, and the New Jersey state troopers who used to drive Governor Corzine around used to beg him to wear a seat belt, but he didn't do it.
Now, before Corzine was Governor of New Jersey, he was the US Senator from New Jersey, and before that, he was the CEO of Goldman Sachs, responsible for taking Goldman Sachs public, making hundreds of millions of dollars.
Now, no matter what you think of Jon Corzine politically or how he made his money, nobody would say that he was stupid.
But there he was, an unrestrained passenger in a car accident, at a time when every American knows that seat belts save lives.
This single story reflects a fundamental weakness in our approach to improving health behavior.
Nearly everything we tell doctors and everything we tell patients is based on the idea that we behave rationally.
If you give me information, I will process that information in my head, and my behavior will change as a result.
Do you think Jon Corzine didn't know that seat belts save lives?
Do you think he, like, just didn't get the memo?
(Laughter) Jon Corzine did not have a knowledge deficit, he had a behavior deficit.
It's not that he didn't know better.
It's that he didn't do better.
Instead, I think the mind is a high-resistance pathway.
Changing someone's mind with information is hard enough.
Changing their behavior with information is harder still.
The only way we're going to make substantial improvements in health and health care is to make substantial improvements in the behavior of health and health care.
If you hit my patellar tendon with a reflex hammer, my leg is going to jerk forward, and it's going to jerk forward a lot faster and a lot more predictably than if I had to think about it myself.
It's a reflex.
We need to look for the equivalent behavioral reflexes and hitch our health care wagon to those.
Turns out, though, that most conventional approaches to human motivation are based on the idea of education.
We assume that if people don't behave as they should, it's because they didn't know any better.
"If only people knew that smoking was dangerous, they wouldn't smoke."
Or, we think about economics.
The assumption there is that we're all constantly calculating the costs and benefits of every one of our actions and optimizing that to make the perfectly right, rational decision.
If that were true, then all we need to do is to find the perfect payment system for doctors or the perfect co-payments and deductibles for patients, and everything would work out.
A better approach lies in behavioral economics.
Behavioral economists recognize that we are irrational.
Our decisions are based on emotion, or they're sensitive to framing or to social context.
We don't always do what's in our own long-term best interests.
But the key contribution to behavioral economics is not in recognizing that we are irrational; it's recognizing that we are irrational in highly predictable ways.
In fact, it's the predictability of our psychological foibles that allows us to design strategies to overcome them.
Forewarned is forearmed.
In fact, behavioral economists often use precisely the same behavioral reflexes that get us into trouble and turn them around to help us, rather than to hurt us.
We see irrationality play out in something called "present bias," where the outcomes in front of us are much more motivating than even more important outcomes far in the future.
If I'm on a diet -- and I'm always on a diet -- (Laughter) and someone offers me a luscious-looking piece of chocolate cake, I know I should not eat that chocolate cake.
That chocolate cake will land on that part of my body -- permanently -- where that kind of food naturally settles.
But the chocolate cake looks so good and delicious, and it's right in front of me, and the diet can wait 'til tomorrow.
I used to love the comedian Steven Wright.
He would have these Zen-like quips.
My favorite one was this: "Hard work pays off in the future, but laziness pays off right now."
(Laughter) And patients also have present bias.
If you have high blood pressure, even if you would desperately like to avoid a stroke, and you know that taking your antihypertensive medications is one of the best ways to reduce that risk, the stroke you avoid is far in the future and taking medications is right now.
Almost half of the patients who are prescribed high blood pressure pills stop taking them within a year.
Think of how many lives we could save if we could solve just that one problem.
We also tend to overestimate the value of small probabilities.
This actually explains why state lotteries are so popular, even though they return pennies on the dollar.
Now, some of you may buy lottery tickets -- it's fun, there's the chance you might strike it rich ...
But let's face it: this would be a horrible way to invest your retirement savings.
I once saw a bumper sticker -- I am not making this up -- that said, "State lotteries are a special tax on people who can't do math."
(Laughter) It's not that we can't do the math, it's that we can't feel the math.
And we also pay much too much attention to regret.
We all hate the feeling of missing out.
So, actually, there was this recent lottery, a mega-jackpot lottery, that had a huge payoff, something like over a billion dollars.
And everyone in my office is pooling money to buy lottery tickets, and I'm not having any of this.
There I am, like, swaggering around the office, "Lotteries are a special tax on people who can't do math."
(Laughter) And then it hits me: uh oh.
What if they win?
(Laughter) I'm the only one who shows up at work the next day.
(Laughter) Now, it's not that I didn't want my colleagues to win.
I just didn't want them to win without me.
Now, it would have been easier if I had just taken my 20-dollar bill and put it into the office shredder, and the results would have been the same.
Even though I knew I shouldn't participate, I handed over my $20 bill, and I never saw it again.
(Laughter) We've done a bunch of experiments with patients in which we give them these electronic pill bottles so we can tell whether they're taking their medication or not.
And we reward them with a lottery.
They get prizes.
But they only get prizes if they had taken their medication the day before.
If not, they get a message that says something like, "You would have won a hundred dollars, but you didn't take your medicine yesterday, so you don't get it."
Well, it turns out, patients hate that.
They hate the sense of missing out, and because they can anticipate that feeling of regret and they'd like to avoid it, they're much more likely to take their medications.
Harnessing that sense of hating regret works.
And it leads to the more general point, which is: once you recognize how people are irrational, you're in a much better position to help them.
Now, this kind of irrationality works out even in men's restrooms.
So, for those of you who don't frequent urinals, let me break this down for you.
(Laughter) There is pee all over the floor.
(Laughter) And it turns out that you can solve this problem by etching the image of a fly in the back of the urinal.
(Laughter) (Applause) And it makes perfect sense.
(Laughter) If I see a fly, I'm gonna get that fly.
(Laughter) That fly is going down.
(Laughter) Now, this naturally begs the question that if men can aim, why were they peeing on the floor in the first place?
In fact, if they were going to pee on the floor, why pee in front of the urinal?
You could pee anywhere.
(Laughter) And the same thing works in health care.
We had a problem in our hospital in which the physicians were prescribing brand-name drugs when a generic drug was available.
Each one of the lines on this graph represents a different drug.
And they're listed according to how often they're prescribed as generic medications.
Those are the top are prescribed as generics 100 percent of the time.
Those down at the bottom are prescribed as generics less than 20 percent of the time.
And we'd have meetings with clinicians and all sorts of education sessions, and nothing worked -- all the lines are pretty much horizontal.
Until, someone installed a little piece of software in the electronic health record that defaulted the prescriptions to generic medications instead of the brand-name drugs.
Now, it doesn't take a statistician to see that this problem was solved overnight, and it has stayed solved ever since.
In fact, in the two and a half years since this program started, our hospital has saved 32 million dollars.
Let me say that again: 32 million dollars.
And all we did was make it easier for the doctors to do what they fundamentally wanted to do all along.
It also works to play into people's notions of loss.
We did this with a contest to help people walk more.
We wanted everyone to walk at least 7,000 steps, and we measured their step count with the accelerometer on their cell phone.
Group A, the control group, just got told whether they had walked 7,000 steps or not.
Group B got a financial incentive.
We gave them $1.40 for every day they walked 7,000 steps.
Group C got the same financial incentive, but it was framed as a loss rather than a gain: $1.40 a day is 42 dollars a month, so we gave these participants 42 dollars at the beginning of each month in a virtual account that they could see, and we took away $1.40 for every day they didn't walk 7,000 steps.
Now, an economist would say that those two financial incentives are the same.
For every day you walk 7,000 steps, you're $1.40 richer.
But a behavioral economist would say that they're different, because we're much more motivated to avoid a $1.40 loss than we are motivated to achieve a $1.40 gain.
And that's exactly what happened.
Those in the group that received $1.40 for every day they walked 7,000 steps were no more likely to meet their goal than the control group.
The financial incentive didn't work.
But those who had a loss-framed incentive met their goal 50 percent more of the time.
It doesn't make economic sense, but it makes psychological sense, because losses loom larger than gains.
And now we're using loss-framed incentives to help patients walk more, lose weight and take their medications.
Money can be a motivator.
We all know that.
But it's far more influential when it's paired with psychology.
And money, of course, has its own disadvantages.
My favorite example of this involves a daycare program.
The greatest sin you can commit in daycare is picking up your kids late.
No one is happy.
Your kids are crying because you don't love them.
(Laughter) The teachers are unhappy because they leave work late.
And you feel terribly guilty.
This daycare program in Israel decided they wanted to stop this problem, and they did something that many daycare programs in the US do, which is they installed a fine for late pickups.
And the fine they chose was 10 shekels, which is about three bucks.
And guess what happened?
Late pickups increased.
And if you think about it, it makes perfect sense.
What a deal!
For 10 shekels -- (Laughter) you can keep my kids all night!
(Laughter) They took a perfectly strong intrinsic motivation not to be late, and they cheapened it.
What's worse, when they realized their mistake and they took away the financial incentive, the late pickups still stayed at the high level.
They had already poisoned the social contract.
Health care is full of strong intrinsic motivations.
We have doctors and patients who already want to do the right thing.
Financial incentives can help, but we shouldn't expect money in health care to do all of the heavy lifting.
Instead, perhaps the most powerful influencers of health behavior are our social interactions.
Social engagement works in health care, and it works in two directions.
First, we fundamentally care what others think of us.
And so one of the most powerful ways to change our behavior is to make our activities witnessable to others.
We behave differently when we're being observed than when we're not.
I've been to some restaurants that don't have sinks in the bathrooms.
Instead, when you step out, the sink is outside in the main part of the restaurant, where everyone can see whether you wash your hands or not.
Now, I don't know for sure, but I am convinced that handwashing is much greater in those particular settings.
We are always on our best behavior when we're being observed.
In fact, there was this amazing study that was done in an intensive care unit in a Florida hospital.
The handwashing rates were very low, which is dangerous, of course, because it can spread infection.
And so some researchers pasted a picture of someone's eyes over the sink.
It wasn't a real person, it was just a photograph.
In fact, it wasn't even their whole face, it was just their eyes looking at you.
(Laughter) Handwashing rates more than doubled.
It seems we care so much what other people think of us that our behavior improves even if we merely imagine that we're being observed.
And not only do we care what others think of us, we fundamentally model our behaviors on what we see other people do.
And it all comes back to seat belts.
When I was a kid, I used to love the "Batman" TV series with Adam West.
Everything that Batman and Robin did was so cool, and, of course, the Batmobile was the coolest thing of all.
Now, that show aired from 1966 to 1968, and at that time, seat belts were optional accessories in cars.
But the producers of that show did something really important.
When Batman and Robin got in the Batmobile, the camera would focus on their laps, and you would see Batman and Robin put on their seat belts.
Now, if Batman and Robin put on their seat belts, you can bet that I was going to wear my seat belt, too.
I bet that show saved thousands of lives.
And again, it works in health care, too.
Doctors use antibiotics more appropriately when they see how other doctors use them.
So many activities in health care are hidden, they're unwitnessed, but doctors are social animals, and they perform better when they see what other doctors do.
So social influence works in health care.
So does tying it to notions of regret or to loss aversion.
We would never think of using these tools if we thought that everyone was rational all the time.
Now, just to be clear: I am not condemning rationality.
I mean, that really would be irrational.
But we all know that it's the nonrational parts of our minds where we get courage, creativity, inspiration and everything else that sparks passion.
And we know something else, too.
We know that we can be much more effective at improving health behavior if we work with the irrational parts of our nature instead of ignoring them or fighting against them.
When it comes to health care, understanding our irrationality is just another tool in our toolbox.
And harnessing that irrationality -- that may be the most rational move of all.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to start by telling you about an email that I saw in my inbox recently.
Now, I have a pretty unusual inbox because I'm a therapist and I write an advice column called "Dear Therapist," so you can imagine what's in there.
I mean, I've read thousands of very personal letters from strangers all over the world.
And these letters range from heartbreak and loss, to spats with parents or siblings.
I keep them in a folder on my laptop, and I've named it "The Problems of Living."
So, I get this email, I get lots of emails just like this, and I want to bring you into my world for a second and read you one of these letters.
And here's how it goes.
"Dear Therapist, I've been married for 10 years and things were good until a couple of years ago.
That's when my husband stopped wanting to have sex as much, and now we barely have sex at all."
I'm sure you guys were not expecting this.
(Laughter) "Well, last night I discovered that for the past few months, he's been secretly having long, late-night phone calls with a woman at his office.
I googled her, and she's gorgeous.
I can't believe this is happening.
My father had an affair with a coworker when I was young and it broke our family apart.
Needless to say, I'm devastated.
If I stay in this marriage, I'll never be able to trust my husband again.
But I don't want to put our kids through a divorce, stepmom situation, etc.
What should I do?"
Well, what do you think she should do?
If you got this letter, you might be thinking about how painful infidelity is.
Or maybe about how especially painful it is here because of her experience growing up with her father.
And like me, you'd probably have some empathy for this woman, and you might even have some, how should I put this nicely, let's just call them "not-so-positive" feelings for her husband.
Now, those are the kinds of things that go through my mind too, when I'm reading these letters in my inbox.
But I have to be really careful when I respond to these letters because I know that every letter I get is actually just a story written by a specific author.
And that another version of this story also exists.
It always does.
And I know this because if I've learned anything as a therapist, it's that we are all unreliable narrators of our own lives.
I am.
You are.
And so is everyone you know.
Which I probably shouldn't have told you because now you're not going to believe my TED Talk.
Look, I don't mean that we purposely mislead.
Most of what people tell me is absolutely true, just from their current points of view.
Depending on what they emphasize or minimize, what they leave in, what they leave out, what they see and want me to see, they tell their stories in a particular way.
The psychologist Jerome Bruner described this beautifully -- he said, "To tell a story is, inescapably, to take a moral stance."
All of us walk around with stories about our lives.
Why choices were made, why things went wrong, why we treated someone a certain way -- because obviously, they deserved it -- why someone treated us a certain way -- even though, obviously, we didn't.
Stories are the way we make sense of our lives.
But what happens when the stories we tell are misleading or incomplete or just wrong?
Well, instead of providing clarity, these stories keep us stuck.
We assume that our circumstances shape our stories.
But what I found time and again in my work is that the exact opposite happens.
The way we narrate our lives shapes what they become.
That's the danger of our stories, because they can really mess us up, but it's also their power.
Because what it means is that if we can change our stories, then we can change our lives.
And today, I want to show you how.
Now, I told you I'm a therapist, and I really am, I'm not being an unreliable narrator.
But if I'm, let's say, on an airplane, and someone asks what I do, I usually say I'm an editor.
And I say that partly because if I say I'm a therapist, I always get some awkward response, like, "Oh, a therapist.
Are you going to psychoanalyze me?"
And I'm thinking, "A : no, and B: why would I do that here?
If I said I was a gynecologist, would you ask if I were about to give you a pelvic exam?"
(Laughter) But the main reason I say I'm an editor is because it's true.
Now, it's the job of all therapists to help people edit, but what's interesting about my specific role as Dear Therapist is that when I edit, I'm not just editing for one person.
I'm trying to teach a whole group of readers how to edit, using one letter each week as the example.
So I'm thinking about things like, "What material is extraneous?"
"Is the protagonist moving forward or going in circles, are the supporting characters important or are they a distraction?"
"Do the plot points reveal a theme?"
And what I've noticed is that most people's stories tend to circle around two key themes.
The first is freedom, and the second is change.
And when I edit, those are the themes that I start with.
So, let's take a look at freedom for a second.
Our stories about freedom go like this: we believe, in general, that we have an enormous amount of freedom.
Except when it comes to the problem at hand, in which case, suddenly, we feel like we have none.
Many of our stories are about feeling trapped, right?
We feel imprisoned by our families, our jobs, our relationships, our pasts.
Sometimes, we even imprison ourselves with a narrative of self-flagellation -- I know you guys all know these stories.
The "everyone's life is better than mine" story, courtesy of social media.
The "I'm an impostor" story, the "I'm unlovable" story, the "nothing will ever work out for me" story.
The "when I say, 'Hey, Siri, ' and she doesn't answer, that means she hates me" story.
The woman who wrote me that letter, she also feels trapped.
If she stays with her husband, she'll never trust him again, but if she leaves, her children will suffer.
Now, there's a cartoon that I think is a perfect example of what's really going on in these stories.
The cartoon shows a prisoner shaking the bars, desperately trying to get out.
But on the right and the left, it's open.
No bars.
The prisoner isn't in jail.
That's most of us.
We feel completely trapped, stuck in our emotional jail cells.
But we don't walk around the bars to freedom because we know there's a catch.
Freedom comes with responsibility.
And if we take responsibility for our role in the story, we might just have to change.
And that's the other common theme that I see in our stories: change.
Those stories sound like this: a person says, "I want to change."
But what they really mean is, "I want another character in the story to change."
Therapists describe this dilemma as: "If the queen had balls, she'd be the king."
I mean -- (Laughter) It makes no sense, right?
Why wouldn't we want the protagonist, who's the hero of the story, to change?
Well, it might be because change, even really positive change, involves a surprising amount of loss.
Loss of the familiar.
Even if the familiar is unpleasant or utterly miserable, at least we know the characters and setting and plot, right down to the recurring dialogue in this story.
"You never do the laundry!"
"I did it last time!"
There's something oddly comforting about knowing exactly how the story is going to go every single time.
To write a new chapter is to venture into the unknown.
It's to stare at a blank page.
And as any writer will tell you, there's nothing more terrifying than a blank page.
But here's the thing.
Once we edit our story, the next chapter becomes much easier to write.
We talk so much in our culture about getting to know ourselves.
But part of getting to know yourself is to unknow yourself.
To let go of the one version of the story you've been telling yourself so that you can live your life, and not the story that you've been telling yourself about your life.
And that's how we walk around those bars.
So I want to go back to the letter from the woman, about the affair.
She asked me what she should do.
Now, I have this word taped up in my office: ultracrepidarianism.
The habit of giving advice or opinions outside of one's knowledge or competence.
It's a great word, right?
You can use it in all different contexts, I'm sure you will be using it after this TED Talk.
I use it because it reminds me that as a therapist, I can help people to sort out what they want to do, but I can't make their life choices for them.
Only you can write your story, and all you need are some tools.
So what I want to do is I want to edit this woman's letter together, right here, as a way to show how we can all revise our stories.
And I want to start by asking you to think of a story that you're telling yourself right now that might not be serving you well.
It might be about a circumstance you're experiencing, it might be about a person in your life, it might even be about yourself.
And I want you to look at the supporting characters.
Who are the people who are helping you to uphold the wrong version of this story?
For instance, if the woman who wrote me that letter told her friends what happened, they would probably offer her what's called "idiot compassion."
Now, in idiot compassion, we go along with the story, we say, "You're right, that's so unfair," when a friend tells us that he didn't get the promotion he wanted, even though we know this has happened several times before because he doesn't really put in the effort, and he probably also steals office supplies.
(Laughter) We say, "Yeah, you're right, he's a jerk," when a friend tells us that her boyfriend broke up with her, even though we know that there are certain ways she tends to behave in relationships, like the incessant texting or the going through his drawers, that tend to lead to this outcome.
We see the problem, it's like, if a fight breaks out in every bar you're going to, it might be you.
(Laughter) In order to be good editors, we need to offer wise compassion, not just to our friends, but to ourselves.
This is what's called -- I think the technical term might be -- "delivering compassionate truth bombs."
And these truth bombs are compassionate, because they help us to see what we've left out of the story.
The truth is, we don't know if this woman's husband is having an affair, or why their sex life changed two years ago, or what those late-night phone calls are really about.
And it might be that because of her history, she's writing a singular story of betrayal, but there's probably something else that she's not willing to let me, in her letter, or maybe even herself, to see.
It's like that guy who's taking a Rorschach test.
You all know what Rorschach tests are?
A psychologist shows you some ink blots, they look like that, and asks, "What do you see?"
So the guy looks at his ink blot and he says, "Well, I definitely don't see blood."
And the examiner says, "Alright, tell me what else you definitely don't see."
In writing, this is called point of view.
What is the narrator not willing to see?
So, I want to read you one more letter.
And it goes like this.
"Dear Therapist, I need help with my wife.
Lately, everything I do irritates her, even small things, like the noise I make when I chew.
At breakfast, I noticed that she even tries to secretly put extra milk in my granola so it won't be as crunchy."
(Laughter) "I feel like she became critical of me after my father died two years ago.
I was very close with him, and her father left when she was young, so she couldn't relate to what I was going through.
There's a friend at work whose father died a few months ago, and who understands my grief.
I wish I could talk to my wife like I talk to my friend, but I feel like she barely tolerates me now.
How can I get my wife back?"
OK.
So, what you probably picked up on is that this is the same story I read you earlier, just told from another narrator's point of view.
Her story was about a husband who's cheating, his story is about a wife who can't understand his grief.
But what's remarkable, is that for all of their differences, what both of these stories are about is a longing for connection.
And if we can get out of the first-person narration and write the story from another character's perspective, suddenly that other character becomes much more sympathetic, and the plot opens up.
That's the hardest step in the editing process, but it's also where change begins.
What would happen if you looked at your story and wrote it from another person's point of view?
What would you see now from this wider perspective?
That's why, when I see people who are depressed, I sometimes say, "You are not the best person to talk to you about you right now," because depression distorts our stories in a very particular way.
It narrows our perspectives.
The same is true when we feel lonely or hurt or rejected.
We create all kinds of stories, distorted through a very narrow lens that we don't even know we're looking through.
And then, we've effectively become our own fake-news broadcasters.
I have a confession to make.
I wrote the husband's version of the letter I read you.
You have no idea how much time I spent debating between granola and pita chips, by the way.
I wrote it based on all of the alternative narratives that I've seen over the years, not just in my therapy practice, but also in my column.
When it's happened that two people involved in the same situation have written to me, unbeknownst to the other, and I have two versions of the same story sitting in my inbox.
That really has happened.
I don't know what the other version of this woman's letter is, but I do know this: she has to write it.
Because with a courageous edit, she'll write a much more nuanced version of her letter that she wrote to me.
Even if her husband is having an affair of any kind -- and maybe he is -- she doesn't need to know what the plot is yet.
Because just by virtue of doing an edit, she'll have so many more possibilities for what the plot can become.
Now, sometimes it happens that I see people who are really stuck, and they're really invested in their stuckness.
We call them help-rejecting complainers.
I'm sure you know people like this.
They're the people who, when you try to offer them a suggestion, they reject it with, "Yeah, no, that will never work, because ..."
"Yeah, no, that's impossible, because I can't do that."
"Yeah, I really want more friends, but people are just so annoying."
(Laughter) What they're really rejecting is an edit to their story of misery and stuckness.
And so, with these people, I usually take a different approach.
And what I do is I say something else.
I say to them, "We're all going to die."
I bet you're really glad I'm not your therapist right now.
Because they look back at me the way you're looking back at me right now, with this look of utter confusion.
But then I explain that there's a story that gets written about all of us, eventually.
It's called an obituary.
And I say that instead of being authors of our own unhappiness, we get to shape these stories while we're still alive.
We get to be the hero and not the victim in our stories, we get to choose what goes on the page that lives in our minds and shapes our realities.
I tell them that life is about deciding which stories to listen to and which ones need an edit.
And that it's worth the effort to go through a revision because there's nothing more important to the quality of our lives than the stories we tell ourselves about them.
I say that when it comes to the stories of our lives, we should be aiming for our own personal Pulitzer Prize.
Now, most of us aren't help-rejecting complainers, or at least we don't believe we are.
But it's a role that is so easy to slip into when we feel anxious or angry or vulnerable.
So the next time you're struggling with something, remember, we're all going to die.
(Laughter) And then pull out your editing tools and ask yourself: what do I want my story to be?
And then, go write your masterpiece.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Bacteria are the oldest living organisms on the earth.
They've been here for billions of years, and what they are are single-celled microscopic organisms.
So they're one cell and they have this special property that they only have one piece of DNA.
So they have very few genes and genetic information to encode all of the traits that they carry out.
And the way bacteria make a living is that they consume nutrients from the environment, they grow to twice their size, they cut themselves down in the middle, and one cell becomes two, and so on and so on.
They just grow and divide and grow and divide -- so a kind of boring life, except that what I would argue is that you have an amazing interaction with these critters.
I know you guys think of yourself as humans, and this is sort of how I think of you.
This man is supposed to represent a generic human being, and all of the circles in that man are all the cells that make up your body.
There's about a trillion human cells that make each one of us who we are and able to do all the things that we do.
But you have 10 trillion bacterial cells in you or on you at any moment in your life.
So, 10 times more bacterial cells than human cells on a human being.
And, of course, it's the DNA that counts, so here's all the A, T, Gs and Cs that make up your genetic code and give you all your charming characteristics.
You have about 30,000 genes.
Well, it turns out you have 100 times more bacterial genes playing a role in you or on you all of your life.
So at the best, you're 10 percent human; more likely, about one percent human, depending on which of these metrics you like.
I know you think of yourself as human beings, but I think of you as 90 or 99 percent bacterial.
(Laughter) And these bacteria are not passive riders.
These are incredibly important; they keep us alive.
They cover us in an invisible body armor that keeps environmental insults out so that we stay healthy.
They digest our food, they make our vitamins, they actually educate your immune system to keep bad microbes out.
So they do all these amazing things that help us and are vital for keeping us alive, and they never get any press for that.
But they get a lot of press because they do a lot of terrible things as well.
So there's all kinds of bacteria on the earth that have no business being in you or on you at any time, and if they are, they make you incredibly sick.
And so the question for my lab is whether you want to think about all the good things that bacteria do or all the bad things that bacteria do.
The question we had is: How could they do anything at all?
I mean, they're incredibly small.
You have to have a microscope to see one.
They live this sort of boring life where they grow and divide, and they've always been considered to be these asocial, reclusive organisms.
And so it seemed to us that they're just too small to have an impact on the environment if they simply act as individuals.
So we wanted to think if there couldn't be a different way that bacteria live.
And the clue to this came from another marine bacterium, and it's a bacterium called "Vibrio fischeri."
What you're looking at on this slide is just a person from my lab holding a flask of a liquid culture of a bacterium, a harmless, beautiful bacterium that comes from the ocean, named Vibrio fischeri.
And this bacterium has the special property that it makes light, so it makes bioluminescence, like fireflies make light.
We're not doing anything to the cells here, we just took the picture by turning the lights off in the room, and this is what we see.
And what's actually interesting to us was not that the bacteria made light but when the bacteria made light.
What we noticed is when the bacteria were alone, so when they were in dilute suspension, they made no light.
But when they grew to a certain cell number, all the bacteria turned on light simultaneously.
So the question that we had is: How can bacteria, these primitive organisms, tell the difference from times when they're alone and times when they're in a community, and then all do something together?
And what we figured out is that the way they do that is they talk to each other, and they talk with a chemical language.
So this is now supposed to be my bacterial cell.
When it's alone, it doesn't make any light.
But what it does do is to make and secrete small molecules that you can think of like hormones, and these are the red triangles.
And when the bacteria are alone, the molecules just float away, and so, no light.
But when the bacteria grow and double and they're all participating in making these molecules, the molecule, the extracellular amount of that molecule, increases in proportion to cell number.
And when the molecule hits a certain amount that tells the bacteria how many neighbors there are, they recognize that molecule and all of the bacteria turn on light in synchrony.
And so that's how bioluminescence works -- they're talking with these chemical words.
The reason Vibrio fischeri is doing that comes from the biology -- again, another plug for the animals in the ocean.
Vibrio fischeri lives in this squid.
What you're looking at is the Hawaiian bobtail squid.
It's been turned on its back, and what I hope you can see are these two glowing lobes.
These house the Vibrio fischeri cells.
They live in there, at high cell number.
That molecule is there, and they're making light.
And the reason the squid is willing to put up with these shenanigans is because it wants that light.
The way that this symbiosis works is that this little squid lives just off the coast of Hawaii, just in sort of shallow knee-deep water.
And the squid is nocturnal, so during the day, it buries itself in the sand and sleeps.
But then at night, it has to come out to hunt.
So on bright nights when there's lots of starlight or moonlight, that light can penetrate the depth of the water the squid lives in, since it's just in those couple feet of water.
What the squid has developed is a shutter that can open and close over the specialized light organ housing the bacteria.
And then it has detectors on its back so it can sense how much starlight or moonlight is hitting its back.
And it opens and closes the shutter so the amount of light coming out of the bottom, which is made by the bacterium, exactly matches how much light hits the squid's back, so the squid doesn't make a shadow.
So it actually uses the light from the bacteria to counter-illuminate itself in an antipredation device, so predators can't see its shadow, calculate its trajectory and eat it.
So this is like the stealth bomber of the ocean.
(Laughter) But then if you think about it, this squid has this terrible problem, because it's got this dying, thick culture of bacteria, and it can't sustain that.
And so what happens is, every morning when the sun comes up, the squid goes back to sleep, it buries itself in the sand, and it's got a pump that's attached to its circadian rhythm.
And when the sun comes up, it pumps out, like, 95 percent of the bacteria.
So now the bacteria are dilute, that little hormone molecule is gone, so they're not making light.
But, of course, the squid doesn't care, it's asleep in the sand.
And as the day goes by, the bacteria double, they release the molecule, and then light comes on at night, exactly when the squid wants it.
So first, we figured out how this bacterium does this, but then we brought the tools of molecular biology to this to figure out, really, what's the mechanism.
And what we found -- so this is now supposed to be my bacterial cell -- is that Vibrio fischeri has a protein.
That's the red box -- it's an enzyme that makes that little hormone molecule, the red triangle.
And then as the cells grow, they're all releasing that molecule into the environment, so there's lots of molecule there.
And the bacteria also have a receptor on their cell surface that fits like a lock and key with that molecule.
These are just like the receptors on the surfaces of your cells.
So when the molecule increases to a certain amount, which says something about the number of cells, it locks down into that receptor and information comes into the cells that tells the cells to turn on this collective behavior of making light.
Why this is interesting is because in the past decade, we have found that this is not just some anomaly of this ridiculous, glow-in-the-dark bacterium that lives in the ocean -- all bacteria have systems like this.
So now what we understand is that all bacteria can talk to each other.
They make chemical words, they recognize those words, and they turn on group behaviors that are only successful when all of the cells participate in unison.
So now we have a fancy name for this: we call it "quorum sensing."
They vote with these chemical votes, the vote gets counted, and then everybody responds to the vote.
What's important for today's talk is we know there are hundreds of behaviors that bacteria carry out in these collective fashions.
But the one that's probably the most important to you is virulence.
It's not like a couple bacteria get in you and start secreting some toxins -- you're enormous; that would have no effect on you, you're huge.
But what they do, we now understand, is they get in you, they wait, they start growing, they count themselves with these little molecules, and they recognize when they have the right cell number that if all of the bacteria launch their virulence attack together, they're going to be successful at overcoming an enormous host.
So bacteria always control pathogenicity with quorum sensing.
So that's how it works.
We also then went to look at what are these molecules.
These were the red triangles on my slides before.
This is the Vibrio fischeri molecule.
This is the word that it talks with.
And then we started to look at other bacteria, and these are just a smattering of the molecules that we've discovered.
What I hope you can see is that the molecules are related.
The left-hand part of the molecule is identical in every single species of bacteria.
But the right-hand part of the molecule is a little bit different in every single species.
What that does is to confer exquisite species specificities to these languages.
So each molecule fits into its partner receptor and no other.
So these are private, secret conversations.
These conversations are for intraspecies communication.
Each bacteria uses a particular molecule that's its language that allows it to count its own siblings.
Once we got that far, we thought we were starting to understand that bacteria have these social behaviors.
But what we were really thinking about is that most of the time, bacteria don't live by themselves, they live in incredible mixtures, with hundreds or thousands of other species of bacteria.
And that's depicted on this slide.
So this is just a picture -- a micrograph of your skin.
Anywhere on your body, it looks pretty much like this.
What I hope you can see is that there's all kinds of bacteria there.
And so we started to think, if this really is about communication in bacteria, and it's about counting your neighbors, it's not enough to be able to only talk within your species.
There has to be a way to take a census of the rest of the bacteria in the population.
So we went back to molecular biology and started studying different bacteria.
And what we've found now is that, in fact, bacteria are multilingual.
They all have a species-specific system, they have a molecule that says "me."
But then running in parallel to that is a second system that we've discovered, that's generic.
So they have a second enzyme that makes a second signal, and it has its own receptor, and this molecule is the trade language of bacteria.
It's used by all different bacteria, and it's the language of interspecies communication.
What happens is that bacteria are able to count how many of "me" and how many of "you."
And they take that information inside, and they decide what tasks to carry out depending on who's in the minority and who's in the majority of any given population.
Then, again, we turned to chemistry, and we figured out what this generic molecule is -- that was the pink ovals on my last slide, this is it.
It's a very small, five-carbon molecule.
And what the important thing is that we learned is that every bacterium has exactly the same enzyme and makes exactly the same molecule.
So they're all using this molecule for interspecies communication.
This is the bacterial Esperanto.
(Laughter) So once we got that far, we started to learn that bacteria can talk to each other with this chemical language.
But we started to think that maybe there is something practical that we can do here as well.
I've told you that bacteria have all these social behaviors, that they communicate with these molecules.
Of course, I've also told you that one of the important things they do is to initiate pathogenicity using quorum sensing.
So we thought: What if we made these bacteria so they can't talk or they can't hear?
Couldn't these be new kinds of antibiotics?
And of course, you've just heard and you already know that we're running out of antibiotics.
Bacteria are incredibly multi-drug-resistant right now, and that's because all of the antibiotics that we use kill bacteria.
They either pop the bacterial membrane, they make the bacterium so it can't replicate its DNA.
We kill bacteria with traditional antibiotics, and that selects for resistant mutants.
And so now, of course, we have this global problem in infectious diseases.
So we thought, what if we could sort of do behavior modifications, just make these bacteria so they can't talk, they can't count, and they don't know to launch virulence?
So that's exactly what we've done, and we've sort of taken two strategies.
The first one is, we've targeted the intraspecies communication system.
So we made molecules that look kind of like the real molecules, which you saw, but they're a little bit different.
And so they lock into those receptors, and they jam recognition of the real thing.
So by targeting the red system, what we are able to do is make species-specific, or disease-specific, anti-quorum-sensing molecules.
We've also done the same thing with the pink system.
We've taken that universal molecule and turned it around a little bit so that we've made antagonists of the interspecies communication system.
The hope is that these will be used as broad-spectrum antibiotics that work against all bacteria.
And so to finish, I'll show you the strategy.
In this one, I'm just using the interspecies molecule, but the logic is exactly the same.
So what you know is that when that bacterium gets into the animal -- in this case, a mouse -- it doesn't initiate virulence right away.
It gets in, it starts growing, it starts secreting its quorum-sensing molecules.
It recognizes when it has enough bacteria that now they're going to launch their attack, and the animal dies.
And so what we've been able to do is to give these virulent infections, but we give them in conjunction with our anti-quorum-sensing molecules.
So these are molecules that look kind of like the real thing, but they're a little different, which I've depicted on this slide.
What we now know is that if we treat the animal with a pathogenic bacterium -- a multi-drug-resistant pathogenic bacterium -- in the same time we give our anti-quorum-sensing molecule, in fact, the animal lives.
And so we think that this is the next generation of antibiotics, and it's going to get us around, at least initially, this big problem of resistance.
What I hope you think is that bacteria can talk to each other, they use chemicals as their words, they have an incredibly complicated chemical lexicon that we're just now starting to learn about.
Of course, what that allows bacteria to do is to be multicellular.
So in the spirit of TED, they're doing things together because it makes a difference.
What happens is that bacteria have these collective behaviors, and they can carry out tasks that they could never accomplish if they simply acted as individuals.
What I would hope that I could further argue to you is that this is the invention of multicellularity.
Bacteria have been on the earth for billions of years; humans, couple hundred thousand.
So we think bacteria made the rules for how multicellular organization works.
And we think by studying bacteria, we're going to be able to have insight about multicellularity in the human body.
So we know that the principles and the rules, if we can figure them out in these sort of primitive organisms, the hope is that they will be applied to other human diseases and human behaviors as well.
I hope that what you've learned is that bacteria can distinguish self from other.
So by using these two molecules, they can say "me" and they can say "you."
And again, of course, that's what we do, both in a molecular way, and also in an outward way, but I think about the molecular stuff.
This is exactly what happens in your body.
It's not like your heart cells and kidney cells get all mixed up every day, and that's because there's all of this chemistry going on, these molecules that say who each of these groups of cells is and what their tasks should be.
So again, we think bacteria invented that, and you've just evolved a few more bells and whistles, but all of the ideas are in these simple systems that we can study.
And the final thing is, just to reiterate that there's this practical part, and so we've made these anti-quorum-sensing molecules that are being developed as new kinds of therapeutics.
But then, to finish with a plug for all the good and miraculous bacteria that live on the earth, we've also made pro-quorum-sensing molecules.
So we've targeted those systems to make the molecules work better.
So remember, you have these 10 times or more bacterial cells in you or on you, keeping you healthy.
What we're also trying to do is to beef up the conversation of the bacteria that live as mutualists with you, in the hopes of making you more healthy, making those conversations better, so bacteria can do things that we want them to do better than they would be on their own.
Finally, I wanted to show you -- this is my gang at Princeton, New Jersey.
Everything I told you about was discovered by someone in that picture.
And I hope when you learn things, like about how the natural world works -- I just want to say that whenever you read something in the newspaper or you hear some talk about something ridiculous in the natural world, it was done by a child.
So science is done by that demographic.
All of those people are between 20 and 30 years old, and they are the engine that drives scientific discovery in this country.
And it's a really lucky demographic to work with.
(Applause) I keep getting older and older, and they're always the same age.
And it's just a crazy, delightful job.
And I want to thank you for inviting me here, it's a big treat for me to get to come to this conference.
(Applause) Thanks.
(Applause)
I'm in the business of safeguarding secrets, and this includes your secrets.
Cryptographers are the first line of defense in an ongoing war that's been raging for centuries: a war between code makers and code breakers.
And this is a war on information.
The modern battlefield for information is digital.
And it wages across your phones, your computers and the internet.
Our job is to create systems that scramble your emails and credit card numbers, your phone calls and text messages -- and that includes those saucy selfies -- (Laughter) so that all of this information can only be descrambled by the recipient that it's intended for.
Now, until very recently, we thought we'd won this war for good.
Right now, each of your smartphones is using encryption that we thought was unbreakable and that was going to remain that way.
We were wrong, because quantum computers are coming, and they're going to change the game completely.
Throughout history, cryptography and code-breaking has always been this game of cat and mouse.
Back in the 1500s, Queen Mary of the Scots thought she was sending encrypted letters that only her soldiers could decipher.
But Queen Elizabeth of England, she had code breakers that were all over it.
They decrypted Mary's letters, saw that she was attempting to assassinate Elizabeth and, subsequently, they chopped Mary's head off.
A few centuries later, in World War II, the Nazis communicated using the Engima code, a much more complicated encryption scheme that they thought was unbreakable.
But then good old Alan Turing, the same guy who invented what we now call the modern computer, he built a machine and used it to break Enigma.
He deciphered the German messages and helped to bring Hitler and his Third Reich to a halt.
And so the story has gone throughout the centuries.
Cryptographers improve their encryption, and then code breakers fight back and they find a way to break it.
This war's gone back and forth, and it's been pretty neck and neck.
That was until the 1970s, when some cryptographers made a huge breakthrough.
They discovered an extremely powerful way to do encryption called "public-key cryptography."
Unlike all of the prior methods used throughout history, it doesn't require that the two parties that want to send each other confidential information have exchanged the secret key beforehand.
The magic of public-key cryptography is that it allows us to connect securely with anyone in the world, whether we've exchanged data before or not, and to do it so fast that you and I don't even realize it's happening.
Whether you're texting your mate to catch up for a beer, or you're a bank that's transferring billions of dollars to another bank, modern encryption enables us to send data that can be secured in a matter of milliseconds.
The brilliant idea that makes this magic possible, it relies on hard mathematical problems.
Cryptographers are deeply interested in things that calculators can't do.
For example, calculators can multiply any two numbers you like, no matter how big the size.
But going back the other way -- starting with the product and then asking, "Which two numbers multiply to give this one?" -- that's actually a really hard problem.
If I asked you to find which two-digit numbers multiply to give 851, even with a calculator, most people in this room would have a hard time finding the answer by the time I'm finished with this talk.
And if I make the numbers a little larger, then there's no calculator on earth that can do this.
In fact, even the world's fastest supercomputer would take longer than the life age of the universe to find the two numbers that multiply to give this one.
And this problem, called "integer factorization," is exactly what each of your smartphones and laptops is using right now to keep your data secure.
This is the basis of modern encryption.
And the fact that all the computing power on the planet combined can't solve it, that's the reason we cryptographers thought we'd found a way to stay ahead of the code breakers for good.
Perhaps we got a little cocky because just when we thought the war was won, a bunch of 20th-century physicists came to the party, and they revealed that the laws of the universe, the same laws that modern cryptography was built upon, they aren't as we thought they were.
We thought that one object couldn't be in two places at the same time.
It's not the case.
We thought nothing can possibly spin clockwise and anticlockwise simultaneously.
But that's incorrect.
And we thought that two objects on opposite sides of the universe, light years away from each other, they can't possibly influence one another instantaneously.
We were wrong again.
And isn't that always the way life seems to go?
Just when you think you've got everything covered, your ducks in a row, a bunch of physicists come along and reveal that the fundamental laws of the universe are completely different to what you thought?
See, in the teeny tiny subatomic realm, at the level of electrons and protons, the classical laws of physics, the ones that we all know and love, they go out the window.
And it's here that the laws of quantum mechanics kick in.
In quantum mechanics, an electron can be spinning clockwise and anticlockwise at the same time, and a proton can be in two places at once.
It sounds like science fiction, but that's only because the crazy quantum nature of our universe, it hides itself from us.
And it stayed hidden from us until the 20th century.
But now that we've seen it, the whole world is in an arms race to try to build a quantum computer -- a computer that can harness the power of this weird and wacky quantum behavior.
These things are so revolutionary and so powerful that they'll make today's fastest supercomputer look useless in comparison.
In fact, for certain problems that are of great interest to us, today's fastest supercomputer is closer to an abacus than to a quantum computer.
That's right, I'm talking about those little wooden things with the beads.
Quantum computers can simulate chemical and biological processes that are far beyond the reach of our classical computers.
And as such, they promise to help us solve some of our planet's biggest problems.
They're going to help us combat global hunger; to tackle climate change; to find cures for diseases and pandemics for which we've so far been unsuccessful; to create superhuman artificial intelligence; and perhaps even more important than all of those things, they're going to help us understand the very nature of our universe.
But with this incredible potential comes an incredible risk.
Remember those big numbers I talked about earlier?
I'm not talking about 851.
In fact, if anyone in here has been distracted trying to find those factors, I'm going to put you out of your misery and tell you that it's 23 times 37.
(Laughter) I'm talking about the much bigger number that followed it.
While today's fastest supercomputer couldn't find those factors in the life age of the universe, a quantum computer could easily factorize numbers way, way bigger than that one.
Quantum computers will break all of the encryption currently used to protect you and I from hackers.
And they'll do it easily.
Let me put it this way: if quantum computing was a spear, then modern encryption, the same unbreakable system that's protected us for decades, it would be like a shield made of tissue paper.
Anyone with access to a quantum computer will have the master key to unlock anything they like in our digital world.
They could steal money from banks and control economies.
They could power off hospitals or launch nukes.
Or they could just sit back and watch all of us on our webcams without any of us knowing that this is happening.
Now, the fundamental unit of information on all of the computers we're used to, like this one, it's called a "bit."
A single bit can be one of two states: it can be a zero or it can be a one.
When I FaceTime my mum from the other side of the world -- and she's going to kill me for having this slide -- (Laughter) we're actually just sending each other long sequences of zeroes and ones that bounce from computer to computer, from satellite to satellite, transmitting our data at a rapid pace.
Bits are certainly very useful.
In fact, anything we currently do with technology is indebted to the usefulness of bits.
But we're starting to realize that bits are really poor at simulating complex molecules and particles.
And this is because, in some sense, subatomic processes can be doing two or more opposing things at the same time as they follow these bizarre rules of quantum mechanics.
So, late last century, some really brainy physicists had this ingenious idea: to instead build computers that are founded on the principles of quantum mechanics.
Now, the fundamental unit of information of a quantum computer, it's called a "qubit."
It stands for "quantum bit."
Instead of having just two states, like zero or one, a qubit can be an infinite number of states.
And this corresponds to it being some combination of both zero and one at the same time, a phenomenon that we call "superposition."
And when we have two qubits in superposition, we're actually working across all four combinations of zero-zero, zero-one, one-zero and one-one.
With three qubits, we're working in superposition across eight combinations, and so on.
Each time we add a single qubit, we double the number of combinations that we can work with in superposition at the same time.
And so when we scale up to work with many qubits, we can work with an exponential number of combinations at the same time.
And this just hints at where the power of quantum computing is coming from.
Now, in modern encryption, our secret keys, like the two factors of that larger number, they're just long sequences of zeroes and ones.
To find them, a classical computer must go through every single combination, one after the other, until it finds the one that works and breaks our encryption.
But on a quantum computer, with enough qubits in superposition, information can be extracted from all combinations at the same time.
In very few steps, a quantum computer can brush aside all of the incorrect combinations, home in on the correct one and then unlock our treasured secrets.
Now, at the crazy quantum level, something truly incredible is happening here.
The conventional wisdom held by many leading physicists -- and you've got to stay with me on this one -- is that each combination is actually examined by its very own quantum computer inside its very own parallel universe.
Each of these combinations, they add up like waves in a pool of water.
The combinations that are wrong, they cancel each other out.
And the combinations that are right, they reinforce and amplify each other.
So at the end of the quantum computing program, all that's left is the correct answer, that we can then observe here in this universe.
Now, if that doesn't make complete sense to you, don't stress.
(Laughter) You're in good company.
Niels Bohr, one of the pioneers of this field, he once said that anyone who could contemplate quantum mechanics without being profoundly shocked, they haven't understood it.
(Laughter) But you get an idea of what we're up against, and why it's now up to us cryptographers to really step it up.
And we have to do it fast, because quantum computers, they already exist in labs all over the world.
Fortunately, at this minute, they only exist at a relatively small scale, still too small to break our much larger cryptographic keys.
But we might not be safe for long.
Some folks believe that secret government agencies have already built a big enough one, and they just haven't told anyone yet.
Some pundits say they're more like 10 years off.
Some people say it's more like 30.
You might think that if quantum computers are 10 years away, surely that's enough time for us cryptographers to figure it out and to secure the internet in time.
But unfortunately, it's not that easy.
Even if we ignore the many years that it takes to standardize and deploy and then roll out new encryption technology, in some ways we may already be too late.
Smart digital criminals and government agencies may already be storing our most sensitive encrypted data in anticipation for the quantum future ahead.
The messages of foreign leaders, of war generals or of individuals who question power, they're encrypted for now.
But as soon as the day comes that someone gets their hands on a quantum computer, they can retroactively break anything from the past.
In certain government and financial sectors or in military organizations, sensitive data has got to remain classified for 25 years.
So if a quantum computer really will exist in 10 years, then these guys are already 15 years too late to quantum-proof their encryption.
So while many scientists around the world are racing to try to build a quantum computer, us cryptographers are urgently looking to reinvent encryption to protect us long before that day comes.
We're looking for new, hard mathematical problems.
We're looking for problems that, just like factorization, can be used on our smartphones and on our laptops today.
But unlike factorization, we need these problems to be so hard that they're even unbreakable with a quantum computer.
In recent years, we've been digging around a much wider realm of mathematics to look for such problems.
We've been looking at numbers and objects that are far more exotic and far more abstract than the ones that you and I are used to, like the ones on our calculators.
And we believe we've found some geometric problems that just might do the trick.
Now, unlike those two- and three-dimensional geometric problems that we used to have to try to solve with pen and graph paper in high school, most of these problems are defined in well over 500 dimensions.
So not only are they a little hard to depict and solve on graph paper, but we believe they're even out of the reach of a quantum computer.
So though it's early days, it's here that we are putting our hope as we try to secure our digital world moving into its quantum future.
Just like all of the other scientists, we cryptographers are tremendously excited at the potential of living in a world alongside quantum computers.
They could be such a force for good.
But no matter what technological future we live in, our secrets will always be a part of our humanity.
And that is worth protecting.
Thanks.
(Applause)
Hi.
It's not because I lost a bet.
Many years ago, I was badly burned.
Most of my body is covered with scars, including the right side of my face.
I just don't have hair. That's just how it happened.
Anyway, now that we discussed facial hair, let's move to social science.
And in particular, I want us to think about where is the potential for humanity and where we are now.
And if you think about it, there's a big gap between where we think we could be and where we are, and it's in all kinds of areas.
So let me ask you: How many of you in the last month have eaten more than you think you should?
Just kind of general. OK.
How many of you in the last month have exercised less than you think you should?
OK, and for how many of you has raising your hands twice been the most exercise you got today?
(Laughter) How many of you have ever texted while driving?
OK, we're getting honest. Let's test your honesty.
How many people here in the last month have not always washed your hands when you left the bathroom?
(Laughter) A little less honest.
By the way, it's interesting how we're willing to admit texting and driving but not washing our hands, that's difficult.
(Laughter) We can go on and on.
The problem, the topic is that there's lots of things when we know what we could do -- we could be very, very different, but we're acting in a very different way.
And when we think how do we bridge that gap, the usual answer is, "Just tell people."
For example, just tell people that texting and driving is dangerous.
Did you know it's dangerous? You should stop doing it.
You tell people something is dangerous, and they will stop.
Texting and driving is one example.
Another very sad example is that in the US, we spend between seven and eight hundred million dollars a year on what's called "financial literacy."
And what do we get as a consequence of that?
There was recently a study that looked at all the research ever to be conducted on financial literacy -- what's called a meta-analysis.
And what they found is that when you tell people, you teach them financial literacy, they learn and they remember.
But do people execute? Not so much.
The improvement is about three or four percent immediately after the course, and then it goes down.
And at the end of the day, the improvement is about 0.1 percent -- not zero, but as humanly close to zero as possible.
(Laughter) So that's the sad news.
The sad news is, giving information to people is just not a good recipe to change behavior.
What is?
Well, social science has made lots of strides, and the basic insight is that if we want to change behavior, we have to change the environment.
The right way is not to change people, it's to change the environment.
And I want to present a very simpleminded model of how to think about it: it's to think about behavioral change in the same way that we think about sending a rocket to space.
When we think about sending a rocket to space, we want to do two main things.
The first one is to reduce friction.
We want to take the rocket and have as little friction as possible so it's the most aerodynamic possible.
And the second thing is we want to load as much fuel as possible, to give it the most amount of motivation, energy to do its task.
And behavior change is the same thing.
So let's first talk about friction.
In this particular case study I'll tell you about, there's a pharmacy, an online pharmacy.
Imagine you go to your doctor.
You have a long-term illness, your doctor prescribes to you a medication, you sign up for this online pharmacy and you get your medication in the mail every 90 days.
Every 90 days, medication, medication, medication.
And this online pharmacy wants to switch people from branded medication to generic medication.
So they send people letters, and they say, "Please, please, please, switch to generics.
You will save money, we will save money, your employer will save money."
And what do people do?
Nothing.
So they try all kinds of things and nothing happens.
So for one year, they give people an amazing offer.
They send people a letter, and they say, "If you switch to generics now, it will be free for a whole year."
Free for a whole year. Amazing!
What percentage of people do you think switched?
Less than 10 percent.
At this point, they show up to my office.
And they come to complain.
Why did they pick me?
I wrote a couple of papers on the "allure of free."
In those papers, we showed that if you reduce the price of something for, let's say, 10 cents to one cent, nothing much happens.
You reduce it from one cent to zero, now people get excited.
(Laughter) And they said, "Look, we read these papers on 'free,' we gave 'free.' Not working as we expected.
What's going on?"
I said, "You know, maybe it's a question of friction."
They said, "What do you mean?"
I said, "People are starting with branded.
They can do nothing and end with branded.
To move to generic, they have to choose generic over branded, but they also have to do something.
They have to return the letter."
So this is what we call a "confounded design."
Two things are happening at the same time.
It's branded versus generic, but it's doing nothing versus doing something.
So I said, "Why don't we switch it?
Why don't we send people a letter and say, 'We're switching you to generics.
You don't need to do anything.
If you want to stay with branded, please return the letter.'" (Laughter) Right?
What do you think happened?
Lawyers, lawyers happened.
(Laughter) It turns out, this is illegal.
(Laughter) By the way, for brainstorming and creativity, doing things that are illegal and immoral, it's fine, as long as it's just in the brainstorming phase.
(Laughter) But this was the purity of the idea, because the initial design was the branded had the no-action benefit.
In my illegal, immoral design, generic had the no-action benefit.
But they agreed to give people a T-intersection: send people a letter and say, "If you don't return this letter, we will be forced to stop your medications.
But when you return the letter, you could choose branded at this price, generic at this price."
Now people had to take an action.
They were on even footing. Right?
It wasn't that one had the no-action benefit.
What percentage do you think switched?
The vast majority switched.
So what does it tell us?
Do people like generics, or do we like branded?
We hate returning letters.
(Laughter) This is the story of friction: small things really matter.
And friction is about taking the desired behavior and saying: Where do we have too much friction so it's slowing people down from acting on it?
And every time you see that the desired behavior and the easy behavior are not aligned, it means we want to try and realign them.
That's the first part. We talked about friction.
Now let's talk about motivation.
In this particular study, we were trying to get very poor people in a slum called Kibera in Kenya to save a little bit of money for a rainy day.
You know, if you're very, very poor, you have no extra money, you live hand to mouth, and from time to time, bad things happen.
And when something bad happens, you have nothing to draw on, you borrow.
The Kibera people can borrow at sometimes up to 10 percent interest a week.
And then, of course, it's really hard to get out of it.
You live hand to mouth, something bad happens, you borrow, things get worse and worse and worse.
So we wanted people to keep a little bit of money for a rainy day.
And we thought about what is the motivation, what is the fuel that we need to add?
And we tried all kinds of things.
Some people, we texted them once a week and said, "Please try to save 100 shillings" -- about a dollar -- "this week."
Some people, we sent a text message as if it came from their kids.
So it said, "Hi Mom, hi Dad, this is little Joey" -- whatever the name of the kid was -- "Try and save 100 shillings this week for the future of our family."
Right? I'm Jewish, a little bit of guilt always works.
(Laughter) Some people got 10 percent.
"Save up to a hundred shillings, we'll give you 10 percent."
Some people got 20 percent.
Some people got also 10 percent and 20 percent, but they got it with loss aversion.
What is loss aversion?
Loss aversion is the idea that we hate losing more than we enjoy gaining.
Now, think about somebody who is in a 10-percent condition and they put 40 shillings in.
They put 40 shillings, we give them four more, they say thank you very much.
That person gave up six.
They could have gotten six more if they gave a hundred, but they don't see it.
So we created what we call pre-match.
We put the 10 shillings in at the beginning of the week.
We said, "It's waiting for you!"
And then if somebody puts 40 in, we say, "Oh, you put 40 in, we're leaving four, and we're taking six back."
So in both cases, pre-match or post-match, people get 10 percent.
But in the pre-match, they see the money they did not match leaving their account.
So we have text, text from kids, 10 percent, 20 percent, pre-match, post-match.
And we had one more condition.
It was a coin about this size, with 24 numbers written on it.
And we asked them to put the coin somewhere in their hut, and every week, take a knife and scratch the number for that week -- week one, two, three, four -- scratch it like a minus if they didn't save and scratch it up and down if they saved.
Now, think to yourself: Which one of those methods do you think worked the best?
Text, text from the kids, 10 percent, 20 percent, beginning of the week, end of the week, and the coin?
I'll tell you what the average people think.
We've done these studies of prediction, both in the US and in Kenya.
People think that 20 percent will get a lot of action, 10 percent less, the rest of it will do nothing -- kids, coin, doesn't matter.
People think loss aversion will have a small effect.
What actually happened?
Sending a text reminder once a week helps a lot.
Good news!
This program lasted six months. People forget. Reminding people is great.
Ten percent at the end of the week helped some more.
Financial incentives work.
Twenty percent at the end of the week -- just like 10 percent, no difference.
Ten percent in the beginning of the week helps some more.
Loss aversion works.
Twenty percent in the beginning of the week, just like 10 percent in the beginning of the week, no difference.
And the text message from the kids was just as effective as 20 percent plus loss aversion -- which is amazing, right?
It's amazing how motivating messages from kids were.
And one conclusion is we don't use kids enough.
(Laughter) And, of course, I don't mean in a child labor sense.
But if you think about parents and their kids, we are the best that we can for our kids, and we think about the future, and I think we should think about how to use that amazing source of motivation to get parents to behave in a better way.
But the big surprise of this study was the coin.
The coin basically doubled savings compared to everything else.
And now the question is: Why? What was it about the coin?
So I'll tell you how I started thinking about the coin, and then we'll come back to it.
So you know, when I do research on, let's say, buying coffee, I don't need to go anywhere. I can sit in my office.
I've bought enough coffee. I know how it works.
The details, I'm familiar with.
When you do research in some of the poorest places in the world, you have to go and visit and see what's going on and get some insight about how the system works.
And on that particular day, I'm in a place called Soweto in South Africa, and I'm sitting in a place that sells funeral insurance.
You know, in the US people spend crazy amounts of money on weddings?
In South Africa, it's funerals.
People spend up to a year or two years of income on funerals.
And I sit in this place -- by the way, before you judge the South Africans as being irrational with this, I just want to remind you that spending a lot of money on funerals compared to weddings, at least you know for sure you only have one.
(Laughter) OK, so I sit in this place that sells funeral insurance.
And this guy comes in with his son -- his son is about 12 -- and he buys funeral insurance for a week.
It will cover 90 percent of his funeral expense only if he dies in the next seven days.
Right? These are very poor people, they buy small amounts of insurance and small amount of soap and such.
And he gets that certificate, and in a very ceremonious way, he gives it to his son.
And as he gives it to his son, I think to myself, why the ceremony?
What is this father doing?
Now, think about the breadwinner that decides on that particular day to direct some money into insurance or savings.
What is the family going to see tonight?
They're going to see less.
Right? At that level of poverty, there'll be less food, less kerosene, less water -- something less tonight.
And what his father was doing and what our coin was trying to do is to say, yes, there's less food on the table, but there's another activity.
You see, what happened is, there are many good, important economic activities, like savings and insurance, that are invisible.
And now the question is: How do we make them visible?
So let's go back to our rocket model.
We have to, first of all, look at the system and see where there's little things we can fix, with friction, where is there that we can remove friction?
And then the next thing we want to do is to think broadly about the system, and say: What other motivations can we bring in?
And that's a much more difficult exercise, and we don't always know what would work best.
Is it going to be money? Is it going to be loss aversion?
Is it going to be something that is visible?
We don't know, and we have to try different things.
We also have to realize that our intuition sometimes misleads us.
We don't always necessarily know what would work the best.
So if we think about this gap between where we could be and where we are, it's a really sad thing to see this gap and to think about it.
But the good news is, there's lots we can do.
Some of the changes are easy, some of the changes are more complex.
But if we'll attack each problem directly, not by just providing more information to people but trying to change the friction, add motivation, I think we can ...
But can we get much better? Absolutely, yes.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Hephaestus, god of technology, was hard at work on his most ingenious invention yet.
He was creating a new defense system for King Minos, who wanted fewer intruders on his island kingdom of Crete.
But mortal guards and ordinary weapons wouldnt suffice, so the visionary god devised an indomitable new defender.
In the fires of his forge, Hephaestus cast his invention in the shape of a giant man.
Made of gleaming bronze; endowed with superhuman strength, and powered by ichor, the life fluid of the gods, this automaton was unlike anything Hephaestus had forged before.
The god named his creation Talos: the first robot.
Three times a day, the bronze guardian marched around the island's perimeter searching for interlopers.
When he identified ships approaching the coast, he hurled massive boulders into their path.
If any survivors made it ashore, he would heat his metal body red-hot and crush victims to his chest.
Talos was intended to fulfill his duties day after day, with no variation.
But despite his robotic behavior, he possessed an internal life his victims could scarcely imagine.
And soon, the behemoth would encounter a ship of invaders that would test his mettle.
The bedraggled crew of Jason, Medea, and the Argonauts were returning from their hard-won quest to retrieve the Golden Fleece.
Their adventure had taken many dark turns, and the weary sailors were desperate to rest in a safe harbor.
Theyd heard tales of Cretes invulnerable bronze colossus, and made for a sheltered cove.
But before they could even drop anchor, Talos spotted them.
While the Argonauts cowered at the approach of the awesome automaton, the sorceress Medea spotted a glinting bolt on the robots ankle and devised a clever gambit.
Medea offered Talos a bargain: she claimed that she could make Talos immortal in exchange for removing the bolt.
Medea's promise resonated deep within his core.
Unaware of his own mechanical nature, and human enough to long for eternal life, Talos agreed.
While Medea muttered incantations, Jason removed the bolt.
As Medea suspected, the bolt was a weak point in Hephaestus design.
The ichor flowed out like molten lead, draining Talos of his power source.
The robot collapsed with a thunderous crash, and the Argonauts were free to travel home.
This story, first recorded in roughly 700 BCE, raises some familiar anxieties about artificial intelligence and even provides an ancient blueprint for science fiction.
But according to historians, ancient robots were more than just myths.
By the 4th century BCE, Greek engineers began making actual automatons including robotic servants and flying models of birds.
None of these creations were as famous as Talos, who appeared on Greek coins, vase paintings, public frescoes, and in theatrical performances.
Even 2,500 years ago, Greeks had already begun to investigate the uncertain line between human and machine.
And like many modern myths about artificial intelligence, Talos tale is as much about his robotic heart as it is about his robotic brain.
Illustrating the demise of Talos on a vase of the fifth century BCE, one painter captured the dying automatons despair with a tear rolling down his bronze cheek.
Consider the claw.
Frequently found on four-limbed animals around the world, its one of natures most versatile tools.
Bears use claws for digging as well as defense.
An eagles needle-like talons can pierce the skulls of their prey.
And lions can retract their massive claws for easy movement, before flicking them out to hunt.
Even the ancestors of primates used to wield these impressive appendages, until their claws evolved into nails.
So what in our evolutionary past led to this manicured adaptation, and what can nails do that their sharper cousins cant?
When nails first appeared in the fossil record around 55.8 million years ago, claws had already been present for over 260 million years in the ancestors of mammals and reptiles.
But despite the gulf of time between their emergence, these adaptations are both part of the same evolutionary story.
Both nails and claws are made of keratin a tough, fibrous protein also found in horns, scales, hooves and hair.
This protein is produced by a wedge of tissue called the keratin matrix.
Rich in blood vessels and nutrients, this protein factory produces an endless stream of keratin, which is tightly packed into cells called keratinocytes.
These high-density cells give nails and claws their trademark toughness.
Since nails evolved from claws, both adaptations produce keratinocytes in the same way.
The cells grow out from the matrix, emerging from the skin where they die and harden into a water-resistant sheath.
The primary difference between the two keratin coverings is really just their shape, which depends on the shape of the bone at the end of the animals digits.
In claws, the bed of keratinocytes conforms to a narrow finger bone, wrapping around the end of the digit and radiating outwards to form a cone-shaped structure.
Animals with nails, on the other hand, have much broader digits, and keratinocytes only cover the top surface of their wide bones.
Its possible that nails have simply persisted as a side effect of primates evolving wider, more dexterous fingers.
But given what we know about the habitats of our primate ancestors, its more likely that nails came with their own powerful advantages.
High in the forest canopy where these primates lived, wide finger bones and expansive finger pads were ideal for gripping narrow branches.
And nails improved that grip even further.
By providing a rigid surface to press against, primates could splay out their pads to create even more contact with the trees.
Additionally, nails improved the sensitivity of their digits by providing an extra surface to detect changes in pressure while climbing.
This combination of sensitivity and dexterity gave our ancestors the precise motor control needed to snatch up insects, pinch berries and seeds, and keep a firm grip on slim branches.
The evolution of nails and the evolution of opposable thumbs and toes are closely linked.
And when our ancestors moved down from the trees, this flexible grasp enabled them to create and wield complex tools.
Even if it was possible for wide fingers to sport claws, their sharp points wouldve likely interfered with these primates regular tasks.
Claws are ideal for piercing, puncturing, and hooking, but their points make grabbing difficult, and potentially dangerous.
However, both claws and nails are used in some unexpected ways.
Manatees use nails to grasp their food, and researchers think elephant toenails may sense vibrations in the ground to help them hear.
Meanwhile, some primates, like the aye-ayes of Madagascar, have re-acquired claws.
They use these extra-long appendages to tap branches and trunks, while listening for hollow sections with their bat-like ears.
When they hear an opening, they burrow into the tree and skewer grubs with their needle-like middle finger.
Weve only scratched the surface of all the incredible ways nails and claws are used throughout the animal kingdom.
But as for which of these adaptations is better?
Thats an answer we may never nail down.
The old story about climate protection is that it's costly, or it would have been done already.
So government needs to make us do something painful to fix it.
The new story about climate protection is that it's not costly, but profitable.
This was a simple sign error, because it's cheaper to save fuel than to buy fuel, as is well known to companies that do it all the time -- for example, Dupont, SD micro electronics.
Many other firms -- IBM -- are reducing their energy intensity routinely six percent a year by fixing up their plants, and they get their money back in two or three years.
That's called a profit.
Now, similarly, the old story about oil is that if we wanted to save very much of it, it would be expensive, or we would have done it already, because markets are essentially perfect.
If, of course, that were true, there would be no innovation, and nobody could make any money.
But the new story about oil is the government doesn't have to force us to do painful things to get off oil -- not just incrementally, but completely -- quite the contrary. The United States, for example, can completely eliminate its use of oil and rejuvenate the economy at the same time, led by business for profit, because it's so much cheaper to save and substitute for the oil than to keep on buying it.
This process will also be catalyzed by the military for its own reasons of combat effectiveness and preventing conflict, particularly over oil.
This thesis is set out in a book called "Winning the Oil Endgame" that four colleagues and I wrote and have posted for free at Oilendgame.com -- about 170,000 downloads so far.
And it was co-sponsored by the Pentagon -- it's independent, it's peer-reviewed and all of the backup calculations are transparently posted for your perusal.
Now, a bit of economic history, I think, may be helpful here.
Around 1850, one of the biggest U.S. industries was whaling.
And whale oil lit practically every building.
But in the nine years before Drake struck oil, in 1859, at least five-sixths of that whale oil-illuminating market disappeared, thanks to fatal competitors, chiefly oil and gas made from coal, to which the whalers had not been paying attention.
So, very unexpectedly, they ran out of customers before they ran out of whales.
The remnant whale populations were saved by technological innovators and profit-maximizing capitalists.
(Laughter) And it's funny -- it feels a bit like this now for oil.
We've been spending the last few decades accumulating a very powerful backlog of technologies for saving and substituting for oil, and no one had bothered to add them up before.
So when we did, we found some very surprising things.
Now, there are two big reasons to be concerned about oil.
Both national competitiveness and national security are at risk.
On the competitiveness front, we all know that Toyota has more market cap than the big three put together.
And serious competition from Europe, from Korea, and next is China, which will soon be a major net exporter of cars.
How long do you think it will take before you can drive home your new wally-badged Shanghai automotive super-efficient car?
Maybe a decade, according to my friends in Detroit.
China has an energy policy based on radical energy efficiency and leap-frog technology.
They're not going to export your uncle's Buick.
And after that comes India.
The point here is, these cars are going to be made super efficient.
The question is, who will make them?
Will we in the United States continue to import efficient cars to replace foreign oil, or will we make efficient cars and import neither the oil nor the cars?
That seems to make more sense.
The more we keep on using the oil, particularly the imported oil, the more we face a very obvious array of problems.
Our analysis assumes that they all cost nothing, but nothing is not the right number.
It could well be enough to double the oil price, for example.
And one of the worst of these is what it does to our standing in the world if other countries think that everything we do is about oil, if we have to treat countries that have oil differently than countries that don't have oil.
And our military get quite unhappy with having to stand guard on pipelines in Far-off-istan when what they actually signed up for was to protect American citizens.
They don't like fighting over oil, they don't like being in the sands and they don't like where the oil money goes and what sort of instability it creates.
Now, in order to avoid these problems, whatever you think they're worth, it's actually not that complicated.
We can save half the oil by using it more efficiently, at a cost of 12 dollars per saved barrel.
And then we can replace the other half with a combination of advanced bio-fuels and safe natural gas.
And that costs on average under 18 dollars a barrel.
And compared with the official forecast, that oil will cost 26 dollars a barrel in 2025, which is half of what we've been paying lately, that will save 70 billion dollars a year, starting quite soon.
Now, in order to do this we need to invest about 180 billion dollars: half of it to retool the car, truck and plane industries; half of it to build the advanced bio-fuel industry.
In the process, we will gain about a million good jobs, mainly rural.
And protect another million jobs now at risk, mainly in auto-making.
And we'll also get returns over 150 billion dollars a year.
So that's a very handsome return.
It's financeable in the private capital market.
But if you want it for the reasons I just mentioned, to happen sooner and with higher confidence, then -- and also to expand choice and manage risk -- then you might like some light-handed public policies that support rather than distorting or opposing the business logic.
And these policies work fine without taxes, subsidies or mandates.
They make a little net money for the treasury.
They have a broad trans-ideological appeal, and because we want them actually to happen, we figured out ways to do them that do not require much, if any, federal legislation, and can, indeed, be done administratively or at a state level.
Just to illustrate what to do about the nub of the problem, namely, light vehicles, here are four ultra-light carbon-composite concept cars with low drag, and all but the one at the upper left have hybrid drive.
You can sort of have it all with these things.
For example, this Opel two-seater does 155 miles an hour at 94 miles a gallon.
This muscle car from Toyota: 408 horsepower in an ultra-light that does zero to 60 in well under four seconds, and still gets 32 miles a gallon. I'll say more later about this.
And in the upper left, a pioneering effort 14 years ago by GM -- 84 miles a gallon without even using a hybrid, in a four-seater.
Well, saving that fuel, 69 percent of the fuel in light vehicles costs about 57 cents per saved gallon.
But it's even a better deal for heavy trucks, where you save a similar amount at 25 cents a gallon, with better aerodynamics and tires and engines, and so on, and taking out weight so you can put it into payload.
So you can double efficiency with a 60 percent internal rate of return.
Then you can go even further, almost tripling efficiency with some operational improvements, double the big haulers' margins.
And we intend to use those numbers to create demand pull, and flip the market.
In the airplane business, it's again a similar story where the first 20 percent fuel saving is free, as Boeing is now demonstrating in its new Dreamliner.
But then the next generation of planes saves about half.
Again, much cheaper than buying the fuel.
And if you go over the next 15 years or so to a blended-wing body, kind of a flying wing with internal engines, then you get about a factor three efficiency improvement at comparable or lower cost.
Let me focus a minute on the light vehicles, the cars and light trucks, because we all know the most about those; probably everybody here drives one.
And yet we may not realize that in a standard sedan, of all the fuel energy you feed into the car, seven-eighths never gets to the wheels; it's lost first in the engine, idling at zero miles a gallon, the power train and accessories.
So then of the energy that does get to the wheels, only an eighth of it, half of that, goes to heat the tires on the road, or to heat the air the car pushes aside.
And only this little bit, only six percent actually ends up accelerating the car and then heating the brakes when you stop.
In fact, since 95 percent of the weight you're moving is the car not the driver, less than one percent of the fuel energy ends up moving the driver.
This is not very gratifying after more than a century of devoted engineering effort.
(Laughter) (Applause) Moreover, three-fourths of the fuel use is caused by the weight of the car.
And it's obvious from the diagram that every unit of energy you save at the wheels is going to avoid wasting another seven units of energy getting that energy to the wheels.
So there's huge leverage for making the car a lot lighter.
And the reason this has not been very seriously examined before is there was a common assumption in the industry that -- well, then it might not be safe if you got whacked by a heavy car, and it would cost a lot more to make, because the only way we know how to make cars much lighter was to use expensive light metals like aluminum and magnesium.
But these objections are now vanishing through advances in materials.
For example, we use a lot of carbon-fiber composites in sporting goods.
And it turns out that these are quite remarkable for safety.
Here's a handmade McLaren SLR carbon car that got t-boned by a Golf.
The Golf was totaled.
The McLaren just popped off and scratched the side panel.
They'll pop it back on and fix the scratch later.
But if this McLaren were to run into a wall at 65 miles an hour, the entire crash energy would be absorbed by a couple of woven carbon-fiber composite cones, weighing a total of 15 pounds, hidden in the front end.
Because these materials could actually absorb six to 12 times as much energy per pound as steel, and do so a lot more smoothly.
And this means we've just cracked the conundrum of safety and weight.
We could make cars bigger, which is protective, but make them light.
Whereas if we made them heavy, they'd be both hostile and inefficient.
And when you make them light in the right way, that can be simpler and cheaper to make.
You can end up saving money, and lives, and oil, all at the same time.
I showed here two years ago a little bit about a design of your basic, uncompromised, quintupled-efficiency suburban-assault vehicle -- (Laughter) -- and this is a complete virtual design that is production-costed manufacturable.
And the process needed to make it is actually coming toward the market quite nicely.
We figured out a kind of a digital inkjet printer for this very stiff, strong, carbon-composite material, and then ways to thermoform it, because it's a combination of carbon and nylon, into whatever complex shapes you want, like the one just shown at the auto show by one of the tier-one suppliers.
And the manufacturing you can do this way gets radically simplified.
Because the auto body has only, say, 14 parts, instead of 100, 150.
Each one is formed by one fairly cheap die set, instead of four expensive ones for stamping steel.
Each of the parts can be easily lifted with no hoist.
They snap together like a kid's toy.
So you got rid of the body shop.
And if you want, you can lay color in the mold, and get rid of the paint shop.
Those are the two hardest and costliest parts of making a car.
So you end up with at least two-fifths lower capital intensity than the leanest plant in the industry, which GM has in Lansing.
The plant also gets smaller.
Now, when you go through a similar analysis for every way we use oil, including buildings, industry, feedstocks and so on, you find that of the 28 million barrels a day the government says we will need in 2025, well, about eight of that can be removed by efficiency by then, with another seven still being saved as the vehicle stocks turn over, at an average cost of only 12 bucks a barrel, instead of 26 for buying the oil.
And then another six can be made robustly, competitively, from cellulosic ethanol and a little bio-diesel, without interfering at all with the water or land needs of crop production.
There is a huge amount of gas to be saved, about half the projected gas at about an eighth of its price.
And here are some no-brainer substitutions of it, with lots left over.
So much, in fact, that after you've handled the domestic oil forecast from areas already approved, you have only this little bit left, and let's see how we can meet that, because there's a pretty flexible menu of ways.
We could, of course, buy more efficiency.
Maybe you ought to buy efficiency at 26 bucks instead of 12.
Or wait to capture the second half of it.
Or we could, of course, just get this little bit by continuing to import some Canadian and Mexican oil, or the ethanol the Brazilians would love to sell us.
But they'll sell it to Japan and China instead, because we have tariff barriers to protect our corn farmers, and they don't.
Or we could use the saved gas directly to cover all of this balance, or if we used it as hydrogen, which is more profitable and efficient, we'd get rid of the domestic oil too.
And that doesn't even count, for example, that available land in the Dakotas can cost effectively make enough wind power to run every highway vehicle in the country.
So we have lots of options.
And the choice of menu and timing is quite flexible.
Now, to make this happen quicker and with higher confidence, there is a few ways government could help.
For example, fee-bates, a combination of a fee and a rebate in any size class of vehicle you want, can increase the price of inefficient vehicles and correspondingly pay you a rebate for efficient vehicles.
You're not paid to change size class.
You are paid to pick efficiency within a size class, in a way equivalent to looking at all fourteen years of life-cycle fuel savings rather than just the first two or three.
This expands choice rapidly in the market, and actually makes more money for automakers as well.
I'd like to deal with the lack of affordable personal mobility in this country by making it very cheaply possible for low-income families to get efficient, reliable, warranted new cars that they could otherwise never get.
And for each car so financed, scrap almost one clunker, preferably the dirtiest ones.
This creates a new million-car-a-year market for Detroit from customers they weren't going to get otherwise, because they weren't creditworthy and could never afford a new car.
And Detroit will make money on every unit.
It turns out that if, say, African-American and white households had the same car ownership, it would cut employment disparity about in half by providing better access to job opportunities.
So this is a huge social win, too.
Governments buy hundreds of thousands of cars a year.
There are smart ways to buy them and to aggregate that purchasing power to bring very efficient vehicles into the market faster.
And we could even do an X Prize-style golden carrot that's worth stretching further for.
For example, a billion-dollar prize for the first U.S. automaker to sell 200,000 really advanced vehicles, like some you saw earlier.
Then the legacy airlines can't afford to buy the efficient new planes they desperately need to cut their fuel bills, but if you felt philosophically you wanted to do anything about that, there are ways to finance it.
And at the same time to scrap inefficient old planes, so that if they were otherwise to come back in the air, they would waste more oil, and block the uptake of efficient, new planes.
Those part inefficient planes are worth more to society dead than alive.
We ought to take them out back and shoot them, and put bounty hunters after them.
Then there's an important military role.
That in creating the move to high-volume, low-cost commercial production of these kinds of materials, or for that matter, ultra-light steels that are a good backup technology, the military can do the trick it did in turning DARPAnet into the Internet.
Just turn it over to the private sector, and we have an Internet.
The same for GPS.
The same for the modern semi-conductor industry.
That is, military science and technology that they need can create the advanced materials-industrial cluster that transforms its civilian economy and gets the country off oil, which would be a huge contribution to eliminating conflict over oil and advancing national and global security.
Then we need to retool the car industry and do retraining, and shift the convergence of the energy and ag-value chains to shift faster from hydrocarbons to carbohydrates, and get out of our own way in other ways.
And make the transition to more efficient vehicles go faster.
But here's how the whole thing fits together.
Instead of official forecasts of oil use and oil imports going forever up, they can turn down with the 12 dollars a barrel efficiency, down steeply by adding the supply-side substitutions at 18 bucks, all implemented at slower rates than we've done before when we paid attention.
And if we start adding tranches of hydrogen in there, we are rapidly off imports and completely off oil in the 2040s.
And the one thing I'd like to point out here is that we've done this before.
In this eight-year period, 1977 to 85, when we last paid attention, the economy grew 27 percent, oil use fell 17 percent, oil imports fell 50 percent, oil imports from the Persian Gulf fell 87 percent.
They would have been gone if we'd kept that up one more year.
Well, that was with very old technologies and delivery methods.
We could rerun that play a lot better now.
And yet what we proved then is the U.S. has more market power than OPEC.
Ours is on the demand side.
We are the Saudi Arabia of "nega-barrels." (Laughter) We can use less oil faster than they can conveniently sell less oil.
(Applause) Whatever your reason for wanting to do this, whether you're concerned about national security or price volatility -- (Laughter) -- or jobs, or the planet, or your grand-kids, it seems to me that this is an oil endgame that we should all be playing to win.
Please download your copy, and thank you very much.
(Applause)
I am going to talk about myself, which I rarely do, because I -- well for one thing, I prefer to talk about things I know nothing about.
And secondly, I'm a recovering narcissist.
(Laughter) I didn't know I was a narcissist actually.
I thought narcissism meant you loved yourself.
And then someone told me there is a flip side to it.
So it's actually drearier than self-love; it's unrequited self-love.
(Laughter) I don't feel I can afford a relapse.
But I want to, though, explain how I came to design my own particular brand of comedy because I've been through so many different forms of it.
I started with improvisation, in a particular form of improvisation called theater games, which had one rule, which I always thought was a great rule for an ethic for a society.
And the rule was, you couldn't deny the other person's reality, you could only build on it.
And of course we live in a society that's all about contradicting other peoples' reality.
It's all about contradiction, which I think is why I'm so sensitive to contradiction in general.
I see it everywhere.
Like polls. You know, it's always curious to me that in public opinion polls the percentage of Americans who don't know the answer to any given question is always two percent.
75 percent of Americans think Alaska is part of Canada.
But only two percent don't know the effect that the debacle in Argentina will have on the IMF's monetary policy -- (Laughter) seems a contradiction.
Or this ad that I read in the New York Times: "Wearing a fine watch speaks loudly of your rank in society.
Buying it from us screams good taste."
(Laughter) Or this that I found in a magazine called California Lawyer, in an article that is surely meant for the lawyers at Enron.
"Surviving the Slammer: Do's and Don'ts."
(Laughter) "Don't use big words."
(Laughter) "Learn the lingua franca."
(Laughter) Yeah. "Lingua this, Frankie."
(Laughter) And I suppose it's a contradiction that I talk about science when I don't know math.
You know, because -- and by the way to I was so grateful to Dean Kamen for pointing out that one of the reasons, that there are cultural reasons that women and minorities don't enter the fields of science and technology -- because for instance, the reason I don't do math is, I was taught to do math and read at the same time.
So you're six years old, you're reading Snow White and the Seven Dwarves, and it becomes rapidly obvious that there are only two kinds of men in the world: dwarves and Prince Charmings.
And the odds are seven to one against your finding the prince.
(Laughter) That's why little girls don't do math. It's too depressing.
(Laughter) Of course, by talking about science I also may, as I did the other night, incur the violent wrath of some scientists who were very upset with me.
I used the word postmodern as if it were OK.
And they got very upset.
One of them, to his credit, I think really just wanted to engage me in a serious argument.
But I don't engage in serious arguments.
I don't approve of them because arguments, of course, are all about contradiction, and they're shaped by the values that I have questions with.
I have questions with the values of Newtonian science, like rationality. You're supposed to be rational in an argument.
Well rationality is constructed by what Christie Hefner was talking about today, that mind-body split, you know?
The head is good, body bad.
Head is ego, body id.
When we say "I," -- as when Rene Descartes said, "I think therefore I am," -- we mean the head.
And as David Lee Roth sang in "Just a Gigolo," "I ain't got no body."
That's how you get rationality.
And that's why so much of humor is the body asserting itself against the head.
That's why you have toilet humor and sexual humor.
That's why you have the Raspyni Brothers whacking Richard in the genital area.
And we're laughing doubly then because he's the body, but it's also -- Voice offstage: Richard.
Emily Levine: Richard. What did I say?
(Laughter) Richard. Yes but it's also the head, the head of the conference.
That's the other way that humor -- like Art Buchwald takes shots at the heads of state.
It doesn't make quite as much money as body humor I'm sure -- (Laughter) but nevertheless, what makes us treasure you and adore you.
There's also a contradiction in rationality in this country though, which is, as much as we revere the head, we are very anti-intellectual.
I know this because I read in the New York Times, the Ayn Rand foundation took out a full-page ad after September 11, in which they said, "The problem is not Iraq or Iran, the problem in this country, facing this country is the university professors and their spawn."
(Laughter) So I went back and re-read "The Fountainhead."
(Laughter) I don't know how many of you have read it.
And I'm not an expert on sadomasochism.
(Laughter) But let me just read you a couple of random passages from page 217.
"The act of a master taking painful contemptuous possession of her, was the kind of rapture she wanted.
When they lay together in bed it was, as it had to be, as the nature of the act demanded, an act of violence.
It was an act of clenched teeth and hatred. It was the unendurable.
Not a caress, but a wave of pain.
The agony as an act of passion."
So you can imagine my surprise on reading in The New Yorker that Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Federal Reserve, claims Ayn Rand as his intellectual mentor.
(Laughter) It's like finding out your nanny is a dominatrix.
(Laughter) Bad enough we had to see J. Edgar Hoover in a dress.
Now we have to picture Alan Greenspan in a black leather corset, with a butt tattoo that says, "Whip inflation now."
(Laughter) And Ayn Rand of course, Ayn Rand is famous for a philosophy called Objectivism, which reflects another value of Newtonian physics, which is objectivity.
Objectivity basically is constructed in that same S&amp;M way.
It's the subject subjugating the object.
That's how you assert yourself.
You make yourself the active voice.
And the object is the passive no-voice.
I was so fascinated by that Oxygen commercial.
I don't know if you know this but -- maybe it's different now, or maybe you were making a statement -- but in many hospital nurseries across the country, until very recently anyway, according to a book by Jessica Benjamin, the signs over the little boys cribs read, "I'm a boy," and the signs over the little girls cribs read, "It's a girl." Yeah.
So the passivity was culturally projected onto the little girls.
And this still goes on as I think I told you last year.
There's a poll that proves -- there was a poll that was given by Time magazine, in which only men were asked, "Have you ever had sex with a woman you actively disliked?"
And well, yeah.
Well, 58 percent said yes, which I think is overinflated though because so many men if you just say, "Have you ever had sex ... " "Yes!"
They don't even wait for the rest of it.
(Laughter) And of course two percent did not know whether they'd had -- (Laughter) That's the first callback, of my attempted quadruple.
(Laughter) So this subject-object thing, is part of something I'm very interested in because this is why, frankly, I believe in political correctness.
I do. I think it can go too far.
I think Ringling Brothers may have gone too far with an ad they took out in the New York Times Magazine.
"We have a lifelong emotional and financial commitment to our Asian Elephant partners."
(Laughter) Maybe too far. But you know -- I don't think that a person of color making fun of white people is the same thing as a white person making fun of people of color.
Or women making fun of men is the same as men making fun of women.
Or poor people making fun of rich people, the same as rich people.
I think you can make fun of the have but not the have-nots, which is why you don't see me making fun of Kenneth Lay and his charming wife.
(Laughter) What's funny about being down to four houses?
(Laughter) And I really learned this lesson during the sex scandals of the Clinton administration or, Or as I call them, the good ol' days.
(Laughter) When people I knew, you know, people who considered themselves liberal, and everything else, were making fun of Jennifer Flowers and Paula Jones.
Basically, they were making fun of them for being trailer trash or white trash.
It seems, I suppose, a harmless prejudice and that you're not really hurting anybody.
Until you read, as I did, an ad in the Los Angeles Times.
"For sale: White trash compactor."
(Laughter) So this whole subject-object thing has relevance to humor in this way.
I read a book by a woman named Amy Richlin, who is the chair of the Classics department at USC.
And the book is called "The Garden of Priapus."
And she says that Roman humor mirrors the construction of Roman society.
So that Roman society was very top/bottom, as ours is to some degree.
And so was humor.
There always had to be the butt of a joke.
So it was always the satirist, like Juvenal or Martial, represented the audience, and he was going to make fun of the outsider, the person who didn't share that subject status.
And in stand-up of course, the stand-up comedian is supposed to dominate the audience.
A lot of heckling is the tension of trying to make sure that the comedian is going to be able to dominate, and overcome the heckler.
And I got good at that when I was in stand up.
But I always hated it because they were dictating the terms of the interaction, in the same way that engaging in a serious argument determines the content, to some degree, of what you're talking about.
And I was looking for a form that didn't have that.
And so I wanted something that was more interactive.
I know that word is so debased now by the use of it by Internet marketers.
I really miss the old telemarketers now, I'll tell you that.
(Laughter) I do, because at least there you stood a chance. You know?
I used to actually hang up on them.
But then I read in "Dear Abby" that that was rude.
So the next time that one called I let him get halfway through his spiel and then I said, "You sound sexy."
(Laughter) He hung up on me!
(Laughter) But the interactivity allows the audience to shape what you're going to do as much as you shape their experience of the world.
And that's really what I'm looking for.
And I was sort of, as I was starting to analyze what exactly it is that I do, I read a book called "Trickster Makes This World," by Lewis Hyde.
And it was like being psychoanalyzed.
I mean he had laid it all out.
And then coming to this conference, I realized that most everybody here shared those same qualities because really what trickster is is an agent of change.
Trickster is a change agent.
And the qualities that I'm about to describe are the qualities that make it possible to make change happen.
And one of these is boundary crossing.
I think this is what so, in fact, infuriated the scientists.
But I like to cross boundaries.
I like to, as I said, talk about things I know nothing about.
(Phone Ringing) I hope that's my agent, because you aren't paying me anything.
(Laughter) And I think it's good to talk about things I know nothing about because I bring a fresh viewpoint to it, you know?
I'm able to see the contradiction that you may not be able to see.
Like for instance a mime once -- or a meme as he called himself.
He was a very selfish meme.
And he said that I had to show more respect because it took up to 18 years to learn how to do mime properly.
And I said, "Well, that's how you know only stupid people go into it."
(Laughter) It only takes two years to learn how to talk.
(Laughter) (Applause) And you know people, this is the problem with quote, objectivity, unquote.
When you're only surrounded by people who speak the same vocabulary as you, or share the same set of assumptions as you, you start to think that that's reality.
Like economists, you know, their definition of rational, that we all act out of our own economic self-interest.
Well, look at Michael Hawley, or look at Dean Kamen, or look at my grandmother.
My grandmother always acted in other people's interests, whether they wanted her to or not.
(Laughter) If they had had an Olympics in martyrdom, my grandmother would have lost on purpose.
(Laughter) "No, you take the prize.
You're young. I'm old. Who's going to see it?
Where am I going? I'm going to die soon."
(Laughter) So that's one -- this boundary crossing, this go-between which -- Fritz Lanting, is that his name, actually said that he was a go-between.
That's an actual quality of the trickster.
And another is, non-oppositional strategies.
And this is instead of contradiction.
Where you deny the other person's reality, you have paradox where you allow more than one reality to coexist, I think there's another philosophical construction.
I'm not sure what it's called.
But my example of it is a sign that I saw in a jewelry store.
It said, "Ears pierced while you wait."
(Laughter) There the alternative just boggles the imagination.
(Laughter) "Oh no. Thanks though, I'll leave them here. Thanks very much.
I have some errands to run. So I'll be back to pick them up around five, if that's OK with you.
Huh? Huh? What? Can't hear you."
(Laughter) And another attribute of the trickster is smart luck.
That accidents, that Louis Kahn, who talked about accidents, this is another quality of the trickster.
The trickster has a mind that is prepared for the unprepared.
That, and I will say this to the scientists, that the trickster has the ability to hold his ideas lightly so that he can let room in for new ideas or to see the contradictions or the hidden problems with his ideas.
I had no joke for that.
I just wanted to put the scientists in their place.
(Laughter) But here's how I think I like to make change, and that is in making connections.
This is what I tend to see almost more than contradictions.
Like the, what do you call those toes of the gecko?
You know, the toes of the gecko, curling and uncurling like the fingers of Michael Moschen.
I love connections.
Like I'll read that one of the two attributes of matter in the Newtonian universe -- there are two attributes of matter in the Newtonian universe -- one is space occupancy. Matter takes up space.
I guess the more you matter the more space you take up, which explains the whole SUV phenomenon.
(Laughter) And the other one though is impenetrability.
Well, in ancient Rome, impenetrability was the criterion of masculinity.
Masculinity depended on you being the active penetrator.
And then, in economics, there's an active producer and a passive consumer, which explains why business always has to penetrate new markets.
Well yeah, I mean why we forced China to open her markets.
And didn't that feel good?
(Laughter) And now we're being penetrated.
You know the biotech companies are actually going inside us and planting their little flags on our genes.
You know we're being penetrated.
And I suspect, by someone who actively dislikes us.
(Laughter) That's the second of the quadruple.
Yes of course you got that. Thank you very much.
I still have a way to go.
(Laughter) And what I hope to do, when I make these connections, is short circuit people's thinking.
You know, make you not follow your usual train of association, but make you rewire.
It literally -- when people say about the shock of recognition, it's literally re-cognition, rewiring how you think -- I had a joke to go with this and I forgot it.
I'm so sorry. I'm getting like the woman in that joke about -- have you heard this joke about the woman driving with her mother?
And the mother is elderly.
And the mother goes right through a red light.
And the daughter doesn't want to say anything.
She doesn't want to be like, "You're too old to drive."
And the mother goes through a second red light.
And the daughter says, as tactfully as possible, "Mom, are you aware that you just went through two red lights?"
And the mother says, "Oh! Am I driving?"
(Laughter) And that's the shock of recognition at the shock of recognition.
That completes the quadruple.
(Laughter) I just want to say two more things.
One is, another characteristic of trickster is that the trickster has to walk this fine line.
He has to have poise.
And you know the biggest hurdle for me, in doing what I do, is constructing my performance so that it's prepared and unprepared.
Finding the balance between those things is always dangerous because you might tip off too much in the direction of unprepared.
But being too prepared doesn't leave room for the accidents to happen.
I was thinking about what Moshe Safdie said yesterday about beauty because in his book, Hyde says that sometimes trickster can tip over into beauty.
But to do that you have to lose all the other qualities because once you're into beauty you're into a finished thing.
You're into something that occupies space and inhabits time.
It's an actual thing.
And it is always extraordinary to see a thing of beauty.
But if you don't do that, if you allow for the accident to keep on happening, you have the possibility of getting on a wavelength.
I like to think of what I do as a probability wave.
When you go into beauty the probability wave collapses into one possibility.
And I like to explore all the possibilities in the hope that you'll be on the wavelength of your audience.
And the one final quality I want to say about trickster is that he doesn't have a home.
He's always on the road.
I want to say to you Richard, in closing, that in TED you've created a home.
And thank you for inviting me into it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I am an architect.
And this picture shows the city that I come from, Beijing, China.
And old Beijing is like a very beautiful garden, you can see a lot of nature.
When I was a kid, I learned to swim in this lake and I climbed mountains every day after school.
But after getting older, we built more and more modern buildings.
And they all look the same.
They all look like matchboxes.
Why are modern buildings and cities full of these boxy shapes?
In this photo, you actually see two cities.
The one on the left is New York, and the one on the right is Tianjin, a Chinese city that's being constructed.
And they have very similar skylines.
Maybe they also follow the same principle.
You know, competing for density, competing for more space, competing for efficiency.
Therefore, modern architecture becomes a symbol of capital and power.
Chinese cities are building a lot, they're also, you know, not only competing for this space and height, they're also learning a lot from North American urban strategies [and] also repeat a lot from city to city.
So here, we call it 1,000 cities with one face.
So as an architect in China, I have to ask myself, what can I do about it?
One day, I was walking on a street, I saw people selling fish.
And they put the fish in this cubic fish tank.
So I was asking the same question, why a cubic space for fish?
Do they like cubic space?
(Laughter) Obviously not.
So maybe the cubic space, cubic architecture, is cheaper, is easier to make.
So, I did this small research, I put a camera and I tried to observe how fish behave in this cubic space.
And then I found they probably weren't happy.
The cubic space wasn't the perfect home for them, so I decided to design a new fish tank for them.
I think it should be more organic, it should be a more fluid space inside.
More complex interiors.
I think they should feel happier living in this space, but I wouldn't know because they don't talk to me.
(Laughter) But one year after, we got this opportunity to design this real building for humans.
This is actually a pair of towers that we built in Mississauga, a city outside Toronto.
And people call this Marilyn Monroe Towers -- (Laughter) because of its curvature.
And the idea was to build a tower, high-rise, residential tower, but not a box.
It's more inspired by nature, with the sunshine and wind dynamics.
After we finished designing the first tower, they told us, you know, "You don't have to design the second one, you just repeat the same design, and we pay you twice."
But I said, "You cannot have two Marilyn Monroes standing there."
And nature never repeats itself, so now we have two buildings that can dance together.
So I have this question for myself.
You know, why, in the modern city, we often think architecture is a machine, is a box?
So here, I want to see how people looked at nature in the past.
By looking into this Chinese traditional painting, I found that they often mixed the nature and the artificial, man-made, in a very dramatic way, so they create this emotional scenery.
So in the modern city, my question is: Is there a way that we don't separate buildings and nature, but combine them?
So there's another project that we built in China.
It's a quite large residential complex.
And it's located in a very beautiful nature setting.
To be honest, the first time when I visited the site, it was too beautiful.
And I almost decided to reject the project because you feel as a criminal to do anything there.
I don't want to become a criminal.
But my second thought was, if I didn't do it, they would just put, you know, standard urban towers there, anyway.
And that would be a pity.
So I decided I had to give it a try.
So the way we did that was we took the contour lines from the existing mountains, and we took those lines and then translated them into a building.
So those towers are actually taking the shapes and geometries from the nature.
So each building has a different shape, a different size, different height.
And they become the extension of the nature [where] they're situated.
And you know, people think we use computer sometimes to design this kind of architecture, but I actually use a lot of hand sketch, because I like the randomness in the hand sketch.
And they can carry sort of emotions that cannot be made by computers.
Architecture and humans and nature can coexist together and are having a good relationship in this photo.
Actually this guy in the photo is one of the architects on our team.
I think he's been enjoying the beautiful nature scenery, and feeling relieved that he is not part of the criminals -- (Laughter) in the end.
Back to the city, in Beijing, we were asked to design these urban towers.
And I made this model.
It's an architecture model, looks like a minimountain and minivalleys.
I put this model on my table, and I watered it every day.
And years later, we completed this building.
And you can see how my hand sketch is being translated into the real building.
And they look quite similar.
It looks like a black mountain.
And this is how this building is situated in the city.
It's on the edge of this beautiful park.
It's different, very different from the surrounding buildings, because other buildings are trying to build a wall around the nature.
But what we're trying to do here is to make the building itself as a part of nature, so we can extend the nature from the park into the city.
So that was the idea.
A Chinese art critic drew this painting.
He put our building in this painting.
Can you see there's a black, tiny mountain?
That looks very fit into this painting.
However, in this reality, our design was being challenged that it looks so different from the surroundings.
And they asked me to modify my design, either color or shape, to make the building fit the context better.
So my question was, why it fits this traditional, you know, natural context, better than the reality?
Maybe there's something wrong with the reality.
Something wrong with the context.
In the very northern part of China, we also built this opera house.
It's an opera house next to the river, in the wetland park.
So we decided to make this building part of the surrounding landscape and merge into the horizon.
The building literally looks like a snow mountain.
And people can walk on the building.
During the day or when there's no opera, people come here, they can enjoy the views, and they can continue their journey from the park onto the building.
When they reach the rooftop, there's an amphitheater that's framing the sky, where they can sing to the sky.
Inside the opera, we have this lobby with a lot of natural light, and they can also enjoy this semi-indoor-outdoor space, and they can see the beautiful view around them.
I've been building several mountains, and here I'm trying to show you one building that I think looks like a cloud.
It's the Lucas Museum of Narrative Arts that's being constructed in the city of Los Angeles.
It's a museum created by George Lucas, the creator of the "Star Wars" movies.
Why a building that looks like a cloud?
Because I think, I imagine, the cloud is mysterious.
It's nature.
It's surreal when this natural element landed in the city.
And it makes you feel curious about it, and you want to explore it.
So that's how the building landed on earth.
By lifting this museum, making it float above the ground, we can free up a lot of landscape and space underneath the building.
And then we can, at the same time, create this roof garden above the building where you can visit and enjoy the view.
This museum will be completed in the year 2022, and you're all invited when it's completed.
So after building all these mountains and clouds, now we're building these volcanoes back in China.
This is actually a huge sports park with four stadiums in it, with one football stadium [with] 40,000 seats in there.
So it's a very large project.
And you see from this photo, you can hardly tell where there's building and where there's landscape.
So the building becomes a landscape.
Even becomes a land art, where people can walk around the building, they can climb this building as they're wandering in this volcano park.
And this rendering shows one of the spaces in those volcanoes.
This is actually a swimming pool with natural light coming from above.
So, what we're trying to create actually is an environment that blurs the boundary in between architecture and nature.
So architecture is no longer a functional machine for living.
It also reflects the nature around us.
It also reflects our soul and spirit.
So, as an architect, I don't think in the future we should repeat those soulless matchboxes anymore.
I think what I'm looking for is the opportunity to create a future with harmony in between humans and nature.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
What I wanted to talk to you about today is two things: one, the rise of a culture of availability; and two, a request.
So we're seeing a rise of this availability being driven by mobile device proliferation, globally, across all social strata.
We're seeing, along with that proliferation of mobile devices, an expectation of availability.
And, with that, comes the third point, which is obligation -- and an obligation to that availability.
And the problem is, we're still working through, from a societal standpoint, how we allow people to be available.
There's a significant delta, in fact, between what we're willing to accept.
Apologies to Hans Rosling -- he said anything that's not using real stats is a lie -- but the big delta there is how we deal with this from a public standpoint.
So we've developed certain tactics and strategies to cover up.
This first one's called "the lean."
And if you've ever been in a meeting where you play sort of meeting "chicken," you're sitting there, looking at the person, waiting for them to look away, and then quickly checking the device.
Although you can see the gentleman up on the right is busting him.
"The stretch."
OK, the gentleman on the left is saying, "Screw you, I'm going to check my device."
But the guy, here, on the right, he's doing the stretch.
It's that reeeee-e-e-each out, the physical contortion to get that device just below the tabletop.
Or, my favorite, the "Love you; mean it."
(Laughter) Nothing says "I love you" like "Let me find somebody else I give a damn about."
Or, this one, coming to us from India.
You can find this on YouTube, the gentleman who's recumbent on a motorcycle while text messaging.
Or what we call the "sweet gravy, stop me before I kill again!"
That is actually the device.
What this is doing is, we find a -- (Laughter) a direct collision -- we find a direct collision between availability -- and what's possible through availability -- and a fundamental human need -- which we've been hearing about a lot, actually -- the need to create shared narratives.
We're very good at creating personal narratives, but it's the shared narratives that make us a culture.
And when you're standing with someone, and you're on your mobile device, effectively what you're saying to them is, "You are not as important as, literally, almost anything that could come to me through this device."
Look around you.
There might be somebody on one right now, participating in multi-dimensional engagement.
(Laughter) Our reality right now is less interesting than the story we're going to tell about it later.
This one I love.
This poor kid, clearly a prop -- don't get me wrong, a willing prop -- but the kiss that's being documented kind of looks like it sucks.
This is the sound of one hand clapping.
So, as we lose the context of our identity, it becomes incredibly important that what you share becomes the context of shared narrative, becomes the context in which we live.
The stories that we tell -- what we push out -- becomes who we are.
People aren't simply projecting identity, they're creating it.
And so that's the request I have for everybody in this room.
We are creating the technology that is going to create the new shared experience, which will create the new world.
And so my request is, please, let's make technologies that make people more human, and not less.
Thank you.
It is almost the end of the winter, and you've woken up to a cold house, which is weird, because you left the heater on all night.
You turn on the light.
It's not working.
Actually, the coffee maker, the TV -- none of them are working.
Life outside also seems to have stopped.
There are no schools, most of the businesses are shut, and there are no working trains.
This is not the opening scene of a zombie apocalypse movie.
This is what happened in March 1989 in the Canadian province of Quebec, when the power grid lost power.
The culprit?
A solar storm.
Solar storms are giant clouds of particles escaping from the Sun from time to time, and a constant reminder that we live in the neighborhood of an active star.
And I, as a solar physicist, I have a tremendous chance to study these solar storms.
But you see, "solar storm chaser" is not just a cool title.
My research helps to understand where they come from, how they behave and, in the long run, aims to mitigate their effects on human societies, which I'll get to in a second.
At the beginning of the space exploration age 50 years ago only, the probes we sent in space revealed that the planets in our Solar System constantly bathe in a stream of particles that are coming from the Sun and that we call the solar wind.
And in the same way that global wind patterns here on Earth can be affected by hurricanes, the solar wind is sometimes affected by solar storms that I like to call "space hurricanes."
When they arrive at planets, they can perturb the space environment, which in turn creates the northern or southern lights, for example, here on Earth, but also Saturn and also Jupiter.
Luckily, here on Earth, we are protected by our planet's natural shield, a magnetic bubble that we call the magnetosphere and that you can see here on the right side.
Nonetheless, solar storms can still be responsible for disrupting satellite telecommunications and operations, for disrupting navigation systems, such as GPS, as well as electric power transmission.
All of these are technologies on which us humans rely more and more.
I mean, imagine if you woke up tomorrow without a working cell phone -- no internet on it, which means no social media.
I mean, to me that would be worse than the zombie apocalypse.
(Laughter) By constantly monitoring the Sun, though, we now know where the solar storms come from.
They come from regions of the Sun where a tremendous amount of energy is being stored.
You have an example here, as a complex structure hanging above the solar surface, just on the verge of erupting.
Unfortunately, we cannot send probes in the scorching hot atmosphere of the Sun, where temperatures can rise up to around 10 million degrees Kelvin.
So what I do is I use computer simulations in order to analyze but also to predict the behavior of these storms when they're just born at the Sun.
This is only one part of the story, though.
When these solar storms are moving in space, some of them will inevitably encounter space probes that we humans have sent in order to explore other worlds.
What I mean by other worlds is, for example, planets, such as Venus or Mercury, but also objects, such as comets.
And while these space probes have been made for different scientific endeavors, they can also act like tiny cosmic meteorological stations and monitor the evolution of these space storms.
So I, with a group of researchers, gather and analyze this data coming from different locations of the Solar System.
And by doing so, my research shows that, actually, solar storms have a generic shape, and that this shape evolves as solar storms move away from the Sun.
And you know what?
This is key for building tools to predict space weather.
I would like to leave you with this beautiful image.
This is us here on Earth, this pale blue dot.
And while I study the Sun and its storms every day, I will always have a deep love for this beautiful planet -- a pale blue dot indeed, but a pale blue dot with an invisible magnetic shield that helps to protect us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So how would you run a whole country without oil?
That's the question that sort of hit me in the middle of a Davos afternoon about four years ago.
It never left my brain.
And I started playing with it more like a puzzle.
The original thought I had: this must be ethanol.
So I went out and researched ethanol, and found out you need the Amazon in your backyard in every country.
About six months later I figured out it must be hydrogen, until some scientist told me the unfortunate truth, which is, you actually use more clean electrons than the ones you get inside a car, if you use hydrogen.
So that is not going to be the path to go.
And then sort of through a process of wandering around, I got to the thought that actually if you could convert an entire country to electric cars, in a way that is convenient and affordable, you could get to a solution.
Now I started this from a point of view that it has to be something that scales en masse.
Not how do you build one car, but how do you scale this so that it can become something that is used by 99 percent of the population?
The thought that came to mind is that it needs to be as good as any car that you would have today.
So one, it has to be more convenient than a car.
And two, it has be more affordable than today's cars.
Affordable is not a 40,000 dollar sedan, right?
Alright? That's not something that we can finance or buy today.
And convenient is not something that you drive for an hour and charge for eight.
So we're bound with the laws of physics and the laws of economics.
And so the thought that I started with was how do you do this, still within the boundary of the science we know today -- no time for science fair, no time for playing around with things or waiting for the magic battery to show up.
How do you do it within the economics that we have today?
How do you do it from the power of the consumer up?
And not from the power of an edict down.
On a random visit to Tesla on some afternoon, I actually found out that the answer comes from separating between the car ownership and the battery ownership.
In a sense if you want to think about it this is the classic "batteries not included."
Now if you separate between the two, you could actually answer the need for a convenient car by creating a network, by creating a network before the cars show up.
The network has two components in them.
First component is you charge the car whenever you stop -- ends up that cars are these strange beasts that drive for about two hours and park for about 22 hours.
If you drive a car in the morning and drive it back in the afternoon the ratio of charge to drive is about a minute for a minute.
And so the first thought that came to mind is, everywhere we park we have electric power.
Now it sounds crazy. But in some places around the world, like Scandinavia, you already have that.
If you park your car and didn't plug in the heater, when you come back you don't have a car. It just doesn't work.
Now that last mile, last foot, in a sense, is the first step of the infrastructure.
The second step of the infrastructure needs to take care of the range extension.
See we're bound by today's technology on batteries, which is about 120 miles if you want to stay within reasonable space and weight limitations.
120 miles is a good enough range for a lot of people.
But you never want to get stuck.
So what we added is a second element to our network, which is a battery swap system.
You drive. You take your depleted battery out.
A full battery comes on. And you drive on.
You don't do it as a human being. You do it as a machine.
It looks like a car wash. You come into your car wash.
And a plate comes up, holds your battery, takes it out, puts it back in, and within two minutes you're back on the road and you can go again.
If you had charge spots everywhere, and you had battery swap stations everywhere, how often would you do it? And it ends up that you'd do swapping less times than you stop at a gas station.
As a matter of fact, we added to the contract.
We said that if you stop to swap your battery more than 50 times a year we start paying you money because it's an inconvenience.
Then we looked at the question of the affordability.
We looked at the question, what happens when the battery is disconnected from the car.
What is the cost of that battery?
Everybody tells us batteries are so expensive.
What we found out, when you move from molecules to electrons, something interesting happens.
We can go back to the original economics of the car and look at it again.
The battery is not the gas tank, in a sense.
Remember in your car you have a gas tank.
You have the crude oil.
And you have refining and delivery of that crude oil as what we call petrol or gasoline.
The battery in this sense, is the crude oil.
We have a battery bay. It costs the same hundred dollars as the gas tank.
But the crude oil is replaced with a battery.
Just it doesn't burn. It consumes itself step after step after step.
It has 2,000 life cycles these days.
And so it's sort of a mini well.
We were asked in the past when we bought an electric car to pay for the entire well, for the life of the car.
Nobody wants to buy a mini well when they buy a car.
In a sense what we've done is we've created a new consumable.
You, today, buy gasoline miles.
And we created electric miles.
And the price of electric miles ends up being a very interesting number.
Today 2010, in volume, when we come to market, it is eight cents a mile.
Those of you who have a hard time calculating what that means -- in the average consumer environment we're in in the U.S.
20 miles per gallon that's a buck 50, a buck 60 a gallon.
That's cheaper than today's gasoline, even in the U.S.
In Europe where taxes are in place, that's the equivalent to a minus 60 dollar barrel.
But e-miles follow Moore's Law.
They go from eight cents a mile in 2010, to four cents a mile in 2015, to two cents a mile by 2020.
Why? Because batteries life cycle improve -- a bit of improvement on energy density, which reduces the price.
And these prices are actually with clean electrons.
We do not use any electrons that come from coal.
So in a sense this is an absolute zero-carbon, zero-fossil fuel electric mile at two cents a mile by 2020.
Now even if we get to 40 miles per gallon by 2020, which is our desire.
Imagine only 40 miles per gallon cars would be on the road.
That is an 80 cent gallon.
An 80 cent gallon means, if the entire Pacific would convert to crude oil, and we'd let any oil company bring it out and refine it, they still can't compete with two cents a mile.
That's a new economic factor, which is fascinating to most people.
Now this would have been a wonderful paper.
That's how I solved it in my head. It was a white paper I handed out to governments.
And some governments told me that it's fascinating that the younger generation actually thinks about these things.
(Laughter) Until I got to the true young global leader, Shimon Peres, President of Israel, and he ran a beautiful manipulation on me.
First he let me go to the prime minister of the country, who told me, if you can find the money you need for this network, 200 million dollars, and if you can find a car company that will build that car in mass volume, in two million cars -- that's what we needed in Israel -- I'll give you country to invest the 200 million into.
Peres thought that was a great idea.
So we went out, and we looked at all the car companies.
We sent letters to all the car companies.
Three of them never showed up. One of them asked us if we would stay with hybrids and they would give us a discount.
But one of them Carlos Ghosn, CEO of Renault and Nissan, when asked about hybrids said something very fascinating.
He said hybrids are like mermaids.
When you want a fish you get a woman and when you need a woman you get a fish.
(Laughter) And Ghosn came up and said, "I have the car, Mr. Peres; I will build you the cars."
And actually true to form, Renault has put a billion and a half dollars in building nine different types of cars that fit this kind of model that will come into the market in mass volume -- mass volume being the first year, 100 thousand cars.
It's the first mass-volume electric car, zero-emission electric car in the market.
I was running, as Chris said, to be the CEO of a large software company called SAP And then Peres said, "Well won't you run this project?"
And I said, "I'm ready for CEO" And he said, "Oh no no no no no. You've got to explain to me, what is more important than saving your country and saving the world, that you would go and do?"
And I had to quit and come and do this thing called A Better Place.
We then decided to scale it up.
We went to other countries. As I said we went to Denmark.
And Denmark set this beautiful policy; it's called the IQ test.
It's inversely proportional to taxes.
They put 180 percent tax on gasoline cars and zero tax on zero-emission cars.
So if you want to buy a gasoline car in Denmark, it costs you about 60,000 Euros.
If you buy our car it's about 20,000 Euros.
If you fail the IQ test they ask you to leave the country.
(Laughter) We then were sort of coined as the guys who run only in small islands.
I know most people don't think of Israel as a small island, but Israel is an island -- it's a transportation island.
If your car is driving outside Israel it's been stolen.
(Laughter) If you're thinking about it in terms of islands, we decided to go to the biggest island that we could find, and that was Australia. The third country we announced was Australia.
It's got three centers -- in Brisbane, in Melbourne, in Sydney -- and one freeway, one electric freeway that connects them.
The next island was not too hard to find, and that was Hawaii.
We decided to come into the U.S.
and pick the two best places -- the one where you didn't need any range extension.
Hawaii you can drive around the island on one battery.
And if you really have a long day you can switch, and keep on driving around the island.
The second one was the San Francisco Bay Area where Gavin Newsom created a beautiful policy across all the mayors.
He decided that he's going to take over the state, unofficially, and then officially, and then created this beautiful Region One policy.
In the San Francisco Bay Area not only do you have the highest concentration of Priuses, but you also have the perfect range extender.
It's called the other car.
As we stared scaling it up we looked at what is the problem to come up to the U.S.?
Why is this a big issue?
And the most fascinating thing we've learned is that, when you have small problems on the individual level, like the price of gasoline to drive every morning.
You don't notice it, but when the aggregate comes up you're dead. Alright?
So the price of oil, much like lots of other curves that we've seen, goes along a depletion curve.
The foundation of this curve is that we keep losing the wells that are close to the ground.
And we keep getting wells that are farther away from the ground.
It becomes more and more and more expensive to dig them out.
You think, well it's been up, it's been down, its been up, it's going to keep on going up and down.
Here is the problem: at 147 dollars a barrel, which we were in six months ago, the U.S. spent a ton of money to get oil.
Then we lost our economy and we went back down to 47 -- sometimes it's 40, sometimes it's 50.
Now we're running a stimulus package.
It's called the trillion-dollar stimulus package.
We're going to revive the economy. Hopefully it happens between now and 2015, somewhere in that space.
What happens when the economy recovers?
By 2015 we would have had at least 250 million new cars even at the pace we're going at right now.
That's another 30 percent demand on oil.
That is another 25 million barrels a day.
That's all the U.S. usage today.
In other words at some point when we've recovered we go up to the peak.
And then we do the OPEC stimulus package also known as 200 dollars a barrel.
We take our money and we give it away.
You know what happens at that point?
We go back down. It's going to go up and down.
And the downs are going to be much longer and the ups are going to be much shorter.
And that's the difference between problems that are additive, like CO2, which we go slowly up and then we tip, and problems that are depletive, in which we lose what we have, which oscillate, and they oscillate until we lose everything we've got.
Now we actually looked at what the answer would be.
Right? Remember in the campaign: one million hybrid cars by 2015.
That is 0.5 percent of the U.S. oil consumption.
That is oh point oh well percent of the rest of the world.
That won't do much difference.
We looked at an MIT study: ten million electric cars on the global roads.
Ten million out of 500 million we will add between now and then.
That is the most pessimistic number you can have.
It's also the most optimistic number because it means we will scale this industry from 100 thousand cars is 2011, to 10 million cars by 2016 -- 100 x growth in less than five years.
You have to remember that the world today is bringing in so many cars.
We have 10 million cars by region.
That's an enormous amount of cars.
China is adding those cars -- India, Russia, Brazil.
We have all these regions.
Europe has solved it. They just put a tax on gasoline.
They'll be the first in line to get off because their prices are high.
China solves it by an edict. At some point they'll just declare that no gasoline car will come into a city, and that will be it.
The Indians don't even understand why we think of it as a problem because most people in India fill two or three gallons every time.
For them to get a battery that goes 120 miles is an extension on range, not a reduction in range.
We're the only ones who don't have the price set right.
We don't have the industry set right.
We don't have any incentive to go and resolve it across the U.S.
Now where is the car industry on that?
Very interesting. The car industry has been focused just on themselves.
They basically looked at it and said, "Car 1.0 we'll solve everything within the car itself."
No infrastructure, no problem.
We forgot about the entire chain around us.
All this stuff that happens around.
We are looking at the emergence of a car 2.0 -- a whole new market, a whole new business model.
The business model in which the money that is actually coming in, to drive the car -- the minutes, the miles if you want, that you are all familiar with -- subsidize the price of the car, just like cellphones. You'll pay for the miles.
And some of it will go back to the car maker.
Some of it will go back to your own pocket.
But our cars are actually going to be cheaper than gasoline cars.
You're looking at a world where cars are matched with windmills.
In Denmark, we will drive all the cars in Denmark from windmills, not from oil.
In Israel, we've asked to put a solar farm in the south of Israel.
And people said, "Oh that's a very very large space that you're asking for."
And we said, "What if we had proven that in the same space we found oil for the country for the next hundred years?"
And they said, "We tried. There isn't any."
We said, "No no, but what if we prove it?"
And they said, "Well you can dig." And we decided to dig up, instead of digging down.
These are perfect matches to one another.
Now all you need is about 10 percent of the electricity generated.
Think of it as a project that spans over about 10 years.
That's one percent a year.
Now when we're looking at solving big problems, we need to start thinking in two numbers.
And those are not 20 percent by 2020.
The two numbers are zero -- as in zero footprint or zero oil -- and scale it infinity.
And when we go to COP15 at the end of this year we can't stop thinking of padding CO2.
We have to start thinking about giving kickers to countries that are willing to go to this kind of scale.
One car emits four tons.
And actually 700 and change million cars today emit 2.8 billion tons of CO2.
That's, in the additive, about 25 percent of our problem.
Cars and trucks add up to about 25 percent of the world's CO2 emissions.
We have to come and attack this problem with a focus, with an effort that actually says, we're going to go to zero before the world ends.
I actually shared that with some legislators here in the U.S.
I shared it with a gentleman called Bobby Kennedy Jr., who is one of my idols.
I told him one of the reasons that his uncle was remembered is because he said we're going to send a man to the moon, and we'll do it by the end of the decade.
We didn't say we're going to send a man 20 percent to the moon.
And there will be about a 20 percent chance we'll recover him.
(Laughter) He actually shared with me another story, which is from about 200 years ago.
200 years ago, in Parliament, in Great Britain, there was a long argument over economy versus morality.
25 percent -- just like 25 percent emissions today comes from cars -- 25 percent of their energy for the entire industrial world in the U.K.
came from a source of energy that was immoral: human slaves.
And there was an argument. Should we stop using slaves?
And what would it do to our economy?
And people said, "Well we need to take time to do it.
Let's not do it immediately. Maybe we free the kids and keep the slaves.
And after a month of arguments they decided to stop slavery, and the industrial revolution started within less than one year.
And the U.K. had 100 years of economic growth.
We have to make the right moral decision.
We have to make it immediately.
We need to have presidential leadership just like we had in Israel that said we will end oil.
And we need to do it not within 20 years or 50 years, but within this presidential term because if we don't, we will lose our economy, right after we'd lost our morality.
Thank you all very much.
(Applause)
The year was 1776.
In Bavaria, new ideals of rationalism, religious freedom, and universal human rights competed with the Catholic churchs heavy influence over public affairs.
Across the Atlantic, a new nation staked its claim for independence on the basis of these ideas.
But back in Bavaria, law professor Adam Weishaupts attempts to teach secular philosophy continued to be frustrated.
Weishaupt decided to spread his ideas through a secret society that would shine a light on the shortcomings of the Churchs ideology.
He called his secret society the Illuminati.
Weishaupt modelled aspects of his secret society off a group called the Freemasons.
Originally an elite stoneworkers guild in the late Middle Ages, the Freemasons had gone from passing down the craft of masonry to more generally promoting ideals of knowledge and reason.
Over time, they had grown into a semi-secret, exclusive order that included many wealthy and influential individuals, with elaborate, secret initiation rituals.
Weishaupt created his parallel society while also joining the Freemasons and recruiting from their ranks.
He adopted the code name Spartacus for himself, after the famed leader of the Roman slave revolt.
Early members became the Illuminatis ruling council, or Areopagus.
One of these members, Baron Adolph Knigge, was also a freemason, and became an influential recruiter.
With Knigges help, the Illuminati expanded their numbers, gained influence within several Masonic chapters, and incorporated Masonic rituals.
By 1784, there were over 600 members, including influential scholars and politicians.
As the Illuminati gained members, the American Revolution also gained momentum.
Thomas Jefferson would later cite Weishaupt as an inspiration.
European monarchs and clergy were fearful of similar revolts on their home soil.
Meanwhile, the existence of the Illuminati had become an open secret.
Both the Illuminati and the Freemasons drew exclusively from societys wealthy elite, which meant they were constantly rubbing shoulders with members of the religious and political establishment.
Many in the government and church believed that both groups were determined to undermine the peoples religious faith.
But these groups didnt necessarily oppose religion they just believed it should be kept separate from governance.
Still, the suspicious Bavarian government started keeping records of alleged members of the Illuminati.
Just as Illuminati members begun to secure important positions in local governments and universities, a 1784 decree by Duke Karl Theodor of Bavaria banned all secret societies.
While a public ban on something ostensibly secret might seem difficult to enforce, in this case it worked.
Only nine years after its founding, the group dissolved, their records were seized, and Weishaupt forced into exile.
The Illuminati would become more notorious in their afterlife than they had ever been in their brief existence.
A decade later, in the aftermath of the French Revolution, conservative authors claimed the Illuminati had survived their banishment and orchestrated the overthrow of the monarchy.
In the United States, preacher Jedidiah Morse promoted similar ideas of an Illuminati conspiracy against the government.
But though the idea of a secret group orchestrating political upheaval is still alive and well today, there is no evidence that the Illuminati survived, reformed, or went underground.
Their brief tenure is well-documented in Bavarian government records, the still-active Freemasonss records, and particularly the overlap between these two sources, without a whisper since.
In the spirit of rationalism the Illuminati embraced, one must conclude they no longer exist.
But the ideas that spurred Weishaupt to found the illuminati still spread, becoming the basis for many Western governments today.
These ideas didnt start or end with the Illuminati instead, it was one community that represented a wave of change that was already underway when it was founded and continued long after it ended.
So, I have a background in technology and magic.
And magicians are interesting.
Their illusions accomplish what technology cannot.
But what happens when the technology of the day seems almost magical?
What happens when you can do this?
(Music) Now, 100 years ago, that would have been the magic of levitation.
Is it possible to create illusions in a world where technology makes anything possible?
Jump!
Now, if you know how the trick is done, where is the illusion?
But still, our imagination is more powerful than our reasoning, and it's easy to attribute personality to machines.
These are quadcopters.
But they are more than mechanical flying machines.
They analyze the environment around them and react to everything I do.
At once, algorithms allow these autonomous machines to fly in close formation, aware of each other and aware of me -- mathematics that can be mistaken for intelligence, and intelligence for personality.
Anthropomorphism: that's the illusion, an illusion created by technology and embroidered by our imagination to become an intelligent flying robot, a machine that appears to be alive.
(Music plays "Close Encounters of the Third Kind") (Quadcopters make tones) I think they say, "Hello."
Hey guys! Come on.
And time to land.
And that's it.
Thank you.
(Applause) OK, guys, time to go home.
Everybody in here.
Come on, everybody, quickly, quickly.
No pushing, everybody can fit.
There you go, a little bit to the left, a little bit to the right.
Come on, everybody, everybody, and ... good job!
(Cheers) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
The future of life, where the unraveling of our biology -- and bring up the lights a little bit. I don't have any slides.
I'm just going to talk -- about where that's likely to carry us.
And you know, I saw all the visions of the first couple of sessions.
It almost made me feel a little bit guilty about having an uplifting talk about the future.
It felt wrong to do that in some way.
And yet, I don't really think it is because when it comes down to it, it's this larger trajectory that is really what is going to remain -- what people in the future are going to remember about this period.
I want to talk to you a little bit about why the visions of Jeremy Rivkins, who would like to ban these sorts of technologies, or of the Bill Joys who would like to relinquish them, are actually -- to follow those paths would be such a tragedy for us.
I'm focusing on biology, the biological sciences.
The reason I'm doing that is because those are going to be the areas that are the most significant to us.
The reason for that is really very simple.
It's because we're flesh and blood.
We're biological creatures.
And what we can do with our biology is going to shape our future and that of our children and that of their children -- whether we gain control over aging, whether we learn to protect ourselves from Alzheimer's, and heart disease, and cancer.
I think that Shakespeare really put it very nicely.
And I'm actually going to use his words in the same order that he did.
(Laughter) He said, "And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe.
And then from hour to hour we rot and rot.
And thereby hangs a tale."
Life is short, you know.
And we need to think about planning a little bit.
We're all going to eventually, even in the developed world, going to have to lose everything that we love.
When you're beginning to rot a little bit, all of the videos crammed into your head, all of the extensions that extend your various powers, are going to being to seem a little secondary.
And you know, I'm getting a little bit gray -- so is Ray Kurzweil, so is Eric Drexler.
This is where it's really central to our lives.
Now I know there's been a whole lot of hype about our power to control biology.
You just have to look at the Human Genome Project.
It wasn't two years ago that everybody was talking about -- we've found the Holy Grail of biology.
We're deciphering the code of codes.
We're reading the book of life.
It's a little bit reminiscent of 1969 when Neil Armstrong walked on the moon, and everybody was about to race out toward the stars.
And we've all seen "2001: A Space Odyssey."
You know it's 2003, and there is no HAL.
And there is no odyssey to our own moon, much less the moons of Jupiter.
And we're still picking up pieces of the Challenger.
So it's not surprising that some people would wonder whether maybe 30 or 40 years from now, we'll look back at this instant in time, and all of the sort of talk about the Human Genome Project, and what all this is going to mean to us -- well, it will really mean precious little.
And I just want to say that that is absolutely not going to be the case.
Because when we talk about our genetics and our biology, and modifying and altering and adjusting these things, we're talking about changing ourselves.
And this is very critical stuff.
If you have any doubts about how technology affects our lives, you just have to go to any major city.
This is not the stomping ground of our Pleistocene ancestors.
What's happening is we're taking this technology -- it's becoming more precise, more potent -- and we're turning it back upon ourselves.
Before it's all done we are going to alter ourselves every bit as much as we have changed the world around us.
It's going to happen a lot sooner than people imagine.
On the way there it's going to completely revolutionize medicine and health care; that's obvious.
It's going to change the way we have children.
It's going to change the way we manage and alter our emotions.
It's going to probably change the human lifespan.
It will really make us question what it is to be a human being.
The larger context of this is that are two unprecedented revolutions that are going on today.
The first of them is the obvious one, the silicon revolution, which you all are very, very familiar with.
It's changing our lives in so many ways, and it will continue to do that.
What the essence of that is, is that we're taking the sand at our feet, the inert silicon at our feet, and we're breathing a level of complexity into it that rivals that of life itself, and may even surpass it.
As an outgrowth of that, as a child of that revolution, is the revolution in biology.
The genomics revolution, proteomics, metabolomics, all of these "omics" that sound so terrific on grants and on business plans.
What we're doing is we are seizing control of our evolutionary future.
I mean we're essentially using technology to just jam evolution into fast-forward.
It's not at all clear where it's going to take us.
But in five to ten years we're going to start see some very profound changes.
The most immediate changes that we'll see are things like in medicine.
There is going to be a big shift towards preventative medicine as we start to be able to identify all of the risk factors that we have as individuals.
But who is going to pay for all this?
And how are we going to understand all this complex information?
That is going to be the IT challenge of the next generation, is communicating all this information.
There's pharmacogenomics, the combination of pharmacology and genetics: tailoring drugs to our individual constitutions that Juan talked about a little bit earlier.
That's going to have amazing impacts.
And it's going to be used for diet as well, and nutritional supplements and such.
But it's going to have a big impact because we're going to have niche drugs.
And we aren't going to be able to support the kinds of expenses that we have to create blockbuster drugs today.
The approval process is going to fall apart, actually.
It's too slow.
It's too risk-averse.
And it is really not suited for the future that we're moving into.
Another thing is that we're just going to have to deal with this knowledge.
It's really wonderful when we hear, "Oh, 99.9 percent of the letters in the code are the same.
We're all identical to each other. Isn't it wonderful?"
And look around you and know that what we really care about is that little bit of difference.
We look the same to a visitor from another planet, maybe, but not to each other because we compete with each other all time.
And we're going to have to come to grips with the fact that there are differences between us as individuals that we will know about, and between subpopulations of humans as well.
To deny that that's the case is not a very good start on that.
A generation or so away there are going to be even more profound things that are going to happen.
That's when we're going to begin to use this knowledge to modify ourselves.
Now I don't mean extra gills or something -- something we care about, like aging.
What if we could unravel aging and understand it -- begin to retard the process or even reverse it?
It would change absolutely everything.
And it's obvious to anyone, that if we can do this, we absolutely will do this, whatever the consequences are.
The second is modifying our emotions.
I mean Ritalin, Viagra, things of that sort, Prozac.
You know, this is just clumsy little baby steps.
What if you could take a little concoction of pharmaceuticals that would make you feel really contented, just happy to be you.
Are you going to be able to resist that if it doesn't have any overt side effects?
Probably not.
And if you don't, who are you going to be?
Why do you do what you do?
We're sort of circumventing evolutionary programs that guide our behavior.
It's going to be very challenging to deal with.
The third area is reproduction.
The idea that we're going to chose our children's genes, as we begin to understand what genes say about who we are.
That's the focus of my book "Redesigning Humans," where I talk about the kinds of choices we'll make, and the challenges it's going to present to society.
There are three obvious ways of doing this.
The first is cloning.
It didn't happen.
It's a total media circus.
It will happen in five to 10 years.
And when it does it's not going to be that big a deal.
The birth of a delayed identical twin is not going to shake western civilization.
But there are more important things that are already occurring: embryo screening.
You take a six to eight cell embryo, you tease out one of the cells, you run a genetic test on that cell, and depending on the results of that test you either implant that embryo or you discard it.
It's already done to avoid rare diseases today.
And pretty soon it's going to be possible to avoid virtually all genetic diseases in that way.
As that becomes possible this is going to move from something that is used by those who have infertility problems and are already doing in vitro fertilization, to the wealthy who want to protect their children, to just about everybody else.
And in that process that's going to morph from being just for diseases, to being for lesser vulnerabilities, like risk of manic depression or something, to picking personalities, temperaments, traits, these sorts of things.
Of course there is going to be genetic engineering.
Directly going in -- it's a little bit further away, but not that far away -- going in and altering the genes in the first cell in an embryo.
The way I suspect it will happen is using artificial chromosomes and extra chromosomes, so we go from 46 to 47 or 48.
And one that is not heritable because who would want to pass on to their children the archaic enhancement modules that they got 25 years earlier from their parents?
It's a joke; of course they wouldn't want to do that.
They'll want the new release.
Those kinds of loose analogies with (Laughter) computers, and with programming, are actually much deeper than that.
They are really going to come to operate in this realm.
Now not everything that can be done should be done.
And it won't be done.
But when something is feasible in thousands of laboratories all over the world, which is going to be the case with these technologies, when there are large numbers of people who see them as beneficial, which is already the case, and when they're almost impossible to police, it's not a question of if this is going to happen, it's when and where and how it's going to happen.
Humanity is going to go down this path.
And it's going to do so for two reasons.
The first is that all these technologies are just a spin-off of mainstream medical research that everybody wants to see happen.
It is being funded very very -- in a big way.
The second is, we're human.
That's what we do.
We try and use our technology to improve our lives in one way or another.
To imagine that we're not going to use these technologies when they become available, is as much a denial of who we are as to imagine that we'll use these technologies and not fret and worry about it a great deal.
The lines are going to blur. And they already are between therapy and enhancement, between treatment and prevention, between need and desire.
That's really the central one, I believe.
People can try and ban these things.
They undoubtedly will. They have.
But ultimately all this is going to do is just shift development elsewhere.
It's going to drive these things from view.
It's going to reserve the technology for the wealthy because they are in the best position to circumvent any of these sorts of laws.
And it's going to deny us the information that we need to make wise decisions about how to use these technologies.
So, sure, we need to debate these things.
And I think it's wonderful that we do.
But we shouldn't kid ourselves and think that we're going to reach a consensus about these things.
That is simply not going to happen.
They touch us too deeply.
And they depend too much upon history, upon philosophy, upon religion, upon culture, upon politics.
Some people are going to see this as an abomination, as the worst thing, as just awful.
Other people are going to say, "This is great.
This is the flowering of human endeavor."
The one thing though that is really dangerous about these sorts of technologies, is that it's easy to become seduced by them.
And to focus too much on all the high-technology possibilities that exist.
And to lose touch with the basic rhythms of our biology and our health.
There are too many people that think that high-technology medicine is going to keep them, save them, from overeating, from eating a lot of fast foods, from not getting any exercise.
It's not going to happen.
In the midst of all this amazing technology, and all these things that are occurring, it's really interesting because there is sort of a counter-revolution that is going on: a resurgence of interest in remedies from the past, in nutraceuticals, in all of these sorts of things that some people, in the pharmaceutical industry particularly, like to brand as non-science.
But this whole effort is generated, is driven, by IT as well because that is how we're gathering all this information, and linking it, and integrating it together.
There is a lot in this rich biota that is going to serve us well.
And that's where about half of our drugs come.
So we shouldn't dismiss this because it's an enormous opportunity to use these sorts of results, or these random loose trials from the last thousand years about what has impacts on our health.
And to use our advanced technologies to pull out what is beneficial from this sea of noise, basically.
In fact this isn't just abstract.
I just formed a biotechnology company that is using this sort of an approach to develop therapeutics for Alzheimer's and other diseases of aging, and we're making some real progress.
So here we are.
It's the beginning of a new millennium.
If you look forward, I mean future humans, far before the end of this millennium, in a few hundred years, they are going to look back at this moment.
And from the beginning of today's sessions you'd think that they're going to see this as this horrible difficult, painful period that we struggled through.
And I don't think that's what's going to happen.
They're going to do like everybody does. They are going to forget about all that stuff.
And they are actually going to romanticize this moment in time.
They are going to think about it as this glorious instant when we laid down the very foundations of their lives, of their society, of their future.
You know it's a little bit like a birth.
Where there is this bloody, awful mess happens.
And then what comes out of it? New life.
Actually as was pointed out earlier, we forget about all the struggle there was in getting there.
So to me, it's clear that one of the foundations of that future is going to be the reworking of our biology.
It's going to come gradually at first. It's going to pick up speed.
We're going to make lots of errors.
That's the way these things work.
To me it's an incredible privilege to be alive now and to be able to witness this thing.
It is something that is a unique instant in the history of all of life.
It will always be remembered.
And what's extraordinary is that we're not just observing this, we are the architects of this.
I think that we should be proud of it.
What is so difficult and challenging is that we are also the objects of these changes.
It's our health, it's our lives, it's our future, it's our children.
And that is why they are so very troubling to so many people who would pull back in fear.
I think that our choice in the choice of life, is not whether we're going to go down this path.
We are, definitely.
It's how we hold it in our hearts.
It's how we look at it.
I think Thucydides really spoke to us very clearly in 430 B.C. He put it nicely.
Again, I'll use the words in the same order he did.
"The bravest are surely those who have the clearest vision of what is before them, both glory and danger alike.
And yet notwithstanding, they go out and they meet it."
Thank you.
(Applause)
The AlloSphere: it's a three-story metal sphere in an echo-free chamber.
Think of the AlloSphere as a large, dynamically varying digital microscope that's connected to a supercomputer.
20 researchers can stand on a bridge suspended inside of the sphere, and be completely immersed in their data.
Imagine if a team of physicists could stand inside of an atom and watch and hear electrons spin.
Imagine if a group of sculptors could be inside of a lattice of atoms and sculpt with their material.
Imagine if a team of surgeons could fly into the brain, as though it was a world, and see tissues as landscapes, and hear blood density levels as music.
This is some of the research that you're going to see that we're undertaking at the AlloSphere.
But first a little bit about this group of artists, scientists, and engineers that are working together.
I'm a composer, orchestrally-trained, and the inventor of the AlloSphere.
With my visual artist colleagues, we map complex mathematical algorithms that unfold in time and space, visually and sonically.
Our scientist colleagues are finding new patterns in the information.
And our engineering colleagues are making one of the largest dynamically varying computers in the world for this kind of data exploration.
I'm going to fly you into five research projects in the AlloSphere that are going to take you from biological macroscopic data all the way down to electron spin.
This first project is called the AlloBrain.
And it's our attempt to quantify beauty by finding which regions of the brain are interactive while witnessing something beautiful.
You're flying through the cortex of my colleague's brain.
Our narrative here is real fMRI data that's mapped visually and sonically.
The brain now a world that we can fly through and interact with.
You see 12 intelligent computer agents, the little rectangles that are flying in the brain with you.
They're mining blood density levels.
And they're reporting them back to you sonically.
Higher density levels mean more activity in that point of the brain.
They're actually singing these densities to you with higher pitches mapped to higher densities.
We're now going to move from real biological data to biogenerative algorithms that create artificial nature in our next artistic and scientific installation.
In this artistic and scientific installation, biogenerative algorithms are helping us to understand self-generation and growth: very important for simulation in the nanoscaled sciences.
For artists, we're making new worlds that we can uncover and explore.
These generative algorithms grow over time, and they interact and communicate as a swarm of insects.
Our researchers are interacting with this data by injecting bacterial code, which are computer programs, that allow these creatures to grow over time.
We're going to move now from the biological and the macroscopic world, down into the atomic world, as we fly into a lattice of atoms.
This is real AFM -- Atomic Force Microscope -- data from my colleagues in the Solid State Lighting and Energy Center.
They've discovered a new bond, a new material for transparent solar cells.
We're flying through 2,000 lattice of atoms -- oxygen, hydrogen and zinc.
You view the bond in the triangle.
It's four blue zinc atoms bonding with one white hydrogen atom.
You see the electron flow with the streamlines we as artists have generated for the scientists.
This is allowing them to find the bonding nodes in any lattice of atoms.
We think it makes a beautiful structural art.
The sound that you're hearing are the actual emission spectrums of these atoms.
We've mapped them into the audio domain, so they're singing to you.
Oxygen, hydrogen and zinc have their own signature.
We're going to actually move even further down as we go from this lattice of atoms to one single hydrogen atom.
We're working with our physicist colleagues that have given us the mathematical calculations of the n-dimensional Schrdinger equation in time.
What you're seeing here right now is a superposition of an electron in the lower three orbitals of a hydrogen atom.
You're actually hearing and seeing the electron flow with the lines.
The white dots are the probability wave that will show you where the electron is in any given point of time and space in this particular three-orbital configuration.
In a minute we're going to move to a two-orbital configuration, and you're going to notice a pulsing.
And you're going to hear an undulation between the sound.
This is actually a light emitter.
As the sound starts to pulse and contract, our physicists can tell when a photon is going to be emitted.
They're starting to find new mathematical structures in these calculations.
And they're understanding more about quantum mathematics.
We're going to move even further down, and go to one single electron spin.
This will be the final project that I show you.
Our colleagues in the Center for Quantum Computation and Spintronics are actually measuring with their lasers decoherence in a single electron spin.
We've taken this information and we've made a mathematical model out of it.
You're actually seeing and hearing quantum information flow.
This is very important for the next step in simulating quantum computers and information technology.
So these brief examples that I've shown you give you an idea of the kind of work that we're doing at the University of California, Santa Barbara, to bring together, arts, science and engineering into a new age of math, science and art.
We hope that all of you will come to see the AlloSphere.
Inspire us to think of new ways that we can use this unique instrument that we've created at Santa Barbara.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Before the world of humans began, there was the world of the gods, made of fields, plains and gardens.
Four brothers wandered this celestial realm.
They had no family other than each other they didnt even know who their parents were.
One of the brothers, Deminan, looked different from the others.
His skin was covered in painful scabs, and he wondered why he alone had been marked with this affliction.
One day, while the supreme spirit Yaya was out in his gardens, Deminan and his brothers snuck into Yayas house.
After feasting and exploring, they spotted a giant gourd hanging in the corner.
But as they tried to look inside the gourd, they dropped it.
The gourd broke apart, releasing a deluge that swept the brothers away, separating them from the celestial lands forever.
The waters from the gourd formed a new world.
This realm was covered in seas, which didnt exist in the gods world.
The waters were full of fish and other creatures, and dotted with islands and caves.
This world of seas was also cut off completely from the celestial realm, and the brothers wandered aimlessly, even more lost than they had been before.
One day, three of the brothers stumbled upon a house.
In the house lived an elder named Bayamanacao, and he invited them in.
When Deminan caught up slightly later, he followed them into the house.
Bayamanacao told the brothers he was their grandfather and gave them a gift of special cassava bread.
He revealed their family lineage to them: their mother had been the Earth Mother Goddess Itibi Cahubaba and had died when they were born.
The brothers were grateful for his hospitality and insight into their past.
But then Bayamanacao turned on Deminan, blowing tobacco spittle from his nose onto Deminans back.
The spot where the spittle landed immediately began to swell and sting.
Soon Deminan was delirious and his back was so swollen his brothers feared he would die.
Not knowing what else to do, they cut open the welt.
A turtle emerged from the wound and swam away, alternating easily between sea and land as she went.
When Deminan recovered from his delirium, he finally understood what the curse of his disease meant: he was a caracaracol, able to communicate with the gods.
He was the link between the celestial realm and the earthly realm.
Deminan was the first in a long lineage of caracaracols.
The world of seas he and his brothers had created when they dropped the gourd became the world of humans, where the caracaracols who followed Deminan maintained the delicate balance between people and gods.
But their unique power came at a price: Deminan and all the caracaracols who followed him continued to suffer from the illness that had first marked Deminan as special.
Represented in Taino carvings and figurines with a swollen back and emaciated arms, the caracaracol is both cursed and blessed to be a conduit between worlds.
This is my nephew, Yuan Yuan.
He's five years old, super adorable.
I asked him the other day, "What would you like for your birthday this year?"
He said, "I want to have a one-way mirror Spider-Man mask."
I had absolutely no idea what he was talking about, so I said, "Wow, that's really cool, but how are you going to get it?"
He told me, without a blink of his eyes, "I'm going to tell my mom and make a wish before I go to bed.
My mom will go to shake her mobile phone.
The next morning, the delivery uncle will give it to me when I wake up."
I was about to tease him, but suddenly I realized he was simply telling me the truth, the truth of what shopping looks like for this generation.
If you think of it, for a child like Yuan Yuan, shopping is a very different idea compared to what my generation had in mind.
Shopping is always done on mobile, and payment is all virtual.
A huge shopping revolution is happening in China right now.
Shopping behaviors, and also technology platforms, have evolved differently than elsewhere in the world.
For instance, e-commerce in China is soaring.
It's been growing at twice the speed of the United States and a lot of the growth is coming from mobile.
Every month, 500 million consumers are buying on mobile phones, and to put that into context, that is a total population of the United States, UK and Germany combined.
But it is not just about the scale of the e-commerce, it is the speed of adoption and the aggregation of the ecosystems.
It took China less than five years to become a country of mobile commerce, and that is largely because of the two technology platforms, Alibaba and Tencent.
They own 90 percent of the e-commerce -- pretty much the whole market -- 85 percent of social media, 85 percent of internet payment.
And they also own large volumes of digital content, video, online movie, literature, travel information, gaming.
When this huge base of mobile shoppers meets with aggregated ecosystems, chemical reactions happen.
Today, China is like a huge laboratory generating all sorts of experiments.
You should come to China, because here you will get a glimpse into the future.
One of the trends I have seen concerns the spontaneity of shopping.
Five years ago, in a fashion study, we found that on average, a Chinese consumer would be buying five to eight pairs of shoes.
This number tripled to reach about 25 pairs of shoes a year.
Who would need so many pairs of shoes?
So I asked them, "What are the reasons you buy?"
They told me a list of inspirations: blogs, celebrity news, fashion information.
But really, for many of them, there was no particular reason to buy.
They were just browsing on their mobile site and then buying whatever they saw.
We have observed the same level of spontaneity in everything, from grocery shopping to buying insurance products.
But it is not very difficult to understand if you think about it.
A lot of the Chinese consumers are still very new in their middle-class or upper-middle-class lifestyles, with a strong desire to buy everything new, new products, new services.
And with this integrated ecosystem, it is so easy for them to buy, one click after another.
However, this new shopping behavior is creating a lot of challenges for those once-dominant businesses.
The owner of a fashion company told me that he's so frustrated because his customers keep complaining that his products are not new enough.
Well, for a fashion company, really bad comment.
And he already increased the number of products in each collection.
It doesn't seem to work.
So I told him there's something more important than that.
You've got to give your consumer exactly what they want when they still want it.
And he can learn something from the online apparel players in China.
These companies, they collect real consumer feedback from mobile sites, from social media, and then their designers will translate this information into product ideas, and then send them to microstudios for production.
These microstudios are really key in this overall ecosystem, because they take small orders, 30 garments at a time, and they can also make partially customized pieces.
The fact that all these production designs are done locally, the whole process, from transporting to product on shelf or online sometimes takes only three to four days.
That is super fast, and that is highly responsive to what is in and hot on the market.
And that is giving enormous headaches to traditional retailers who are only thinking about a few collections a year.
Then there's a consumer's need for ultraconvenience.
A couple of months ago, I was shopping with a friend in Tokyo.
We were in the store, and there were three to four people standing in front of us at the checkout counter.
Pretty normal, right?
But both of us dropped our selection and walked away.
This is how impatient we have become.
Delivering ultraconvenience is not just something nice to have.
It is crucial to make sure your consumer actually buys.
And in China, we have learned that convenience is really the glue that will make online shopping a behavior and a habit that sticks.
It is sometimes more effective than a loyalty program alone.
Take Hema.
It's a retail grocery concept developed by Alibaba.
They deliver a full basket of products from 4,000 SKUs to your doorstep within 30 minutes.
What is amazing is that they deliver literally everything: fruits, vegetables, of course.
They also deliver live fish and also live Alaska king crab.
Like my friend once told me, "It's really my dream coming true.
Finally, I can impress my mother-in-law when she comes to visit me for dinner unexpectedly."
(Laughter) Well, companies like Amazon and FreshDirect are also experimenting in the same field.
The fact that Hema is part of the Alibaba ecosystem makes it faster and also a bit easier to implement.
For an online grocery player, it is very difficult, very costly, to deliver a full basket quickly, but for Hema, it's got a mobile app, it's got mobile payment, and also it's built 20 physical stores in high-density areas in Shanghai.
These stores are built to ensure the freshness of the product -- they actually have fish tanks in the store -- and also to give locations that will enable high-speed delivery.
I know the question you have on your mind.
Are they making money?
Yes, they are making money.
They are breaking even, and what is also amazing is that the sales revenue per store is three to four times higher than the traditional grocery store, and half of the revenue orders are coming from mobile.
This is really proof that a consumer, if you give them ultraconvenience that really works in grocery shopping, they're going to switch their shopping behaviors online, like, in no time.
So ultraconvenience and spontaneity, that's not the full story.
The other trend I have seen in China is social shopping.
If you think of social shopping elsewhere in the world, it is a linear process.
You pick up something on Facebook, watch it, and you switch to Amazon or brand.com to complete the shopping journey.
Clean and simple.
But in China it is a very different thing.
On average, a consumer would spend one hour on their mobile phone shopping.
That's three times higher than the United States.
Where does the stickiness come from?
What are they actually doing on this tiny little screen?
So let me take you on a mobile shopping journey that I usually would be experiencing.
11pm, yes, that's usually when I shop.
I was having a chat in a WeChat chatroom with my friends.
One of them took out a pack of snack and posted the product link in that chatroom.
I hate it, because usually I would just click that link and then land on the product page.
Lots of information, very colorful, mind-blowing.
Watched it and then a shop assistant came online and asked me, "How can I help you tonight?"
Of course I bought that pack of snack.
What is more beautiful is I know that the next day, around noontime, that pack of snack will be delivered to my office.
I can eat it and share it with my colleagues and the cost of delivery, maximum one dollar.
Just when I was about to leave that shopping site, another screen popped up.
This time it is the livestreaming of a grassroots celebrity teaching me how to wear a new color of lipstick.
I watched for 30 seconds -- very easy to understand -- and also there is a shopping link right next to it, clicked it, bought it in a few seconds.
Back to the chatroom.
The gossiping is still going on.
Another friend of mine posted the QR code of another pack of snack.
Clicked it, bought it.
So the whole experience is like you're exploring in an amusement park.
It is chaotic, it is fun and it's even a little bit addictive.
This is what's happening when you have this integrated ecosystem.
Shopping is embedded in social, and social is evolving into a multidimensional experience.
The integration of ecosystems reaches a whole new level.
So does its dominance in all aspects of our life.
And of course, there are huge commercial opportunities behind it.
A Chinese snack company, Three Squirrels, built a half-a-billion-dollar business in just three years by investing in 300 to 500 shop assistants who are going to be online to provide services 24/7.
In the social media environment, they are like your neighborhood friends.
Even when you are not buying stuff, they will be happy to just tell you a few jokes and make you happy.
In this integrated ecosystem, social media can really redefine the relationship between brand, retailer and consumer.
These are only fragments of the massive changes I have seen in China.
In this huge laboratory, a lot of experiments are generated every single day.
The ecosystems are reforming, supply chain distribution, marketing, product innovation, everything.
Consumers are getting the power to decide what they want to buy, when they want to buy it, how they want to buy it, how they want to social.
It is now back to business leaders of the world to really open their eyes, see what's happening in China, think about it and take actions.
Thank you.
(Applause) Massimo Portincaso: Angela, what you shared with us is truly impressive and almost incredible, but I think many in the audience had the same question that I had, which is: Is this kind of impulsive consumption both economically and environmentally sustainable over the longer term?
And what is the total price to be paid for such an automized and ultraconvenient retail experience?
Angela Wang: Yeah. One thing we have to keep in mind is really, we are at the very beginning of a huge transformation.
So with this trading up needs of the consumer, together with the evolution of the ecosystem, there are a lot of opportunities and also challenges.
So I've seen some early signs that the ecosystems are shifting their focus to pay attention to solve these challenges.
For example, paying more consideration to sustainability alongside just about speed, and also quality over quantity.
But there are really no simple answers to these questions.
That is exactly why I'm here to tell everyone that we need to watch it, study it, and play a part in this evolution.
MP: Thank you very much.
AW: Thank you.
(Applause)
This is Tim Ferriss circa 1979 A.D. Age two.
You can tell by the power squat, I was a very confident boy -- and not without reason.
I had a very charming routine at the time, which was to wait until late in the evening when my parents were decompressing from a hard day's work, doing their crossword puzzles, watching television.
I would run into the living room, jump up on the couch, rip the cushions off, throw them on the floor, scream at the top of my lungs and run out because I was the Incredible Hulk.
(Laughter) Obviously, you see the resemblance.
And this routine went on for some time.
When I was seven I went to summer camp.
My parents found it necessary for peace of mind.
And at noon each day the campers would go to a pond, where they had floating docks.
You could jump off the end into the deep end.
I was born premature. I was always very small.
My left lung had collapsed when I was born.
And I've always had buoyancy problems.
So water was something that scared me to begin with.
But I would go in on occasion.
And on one particular day, the campers were jumping through inner tubes, They were diving through inner tubes. And I thought this would be great fun.
So I dove through the inner tube, and the bully of the camp grabbed my ankles.
And I tried to come up for air, and my lower back hit the bottom of the inner tube.
And I went wild eyed and thought I was going to die.
A camp counselor fortunately came over and separated us.
From that point onward I was terrified of swimming.
That is something that I did not get over.
My inability to swim has been one of my greatest humiliations and embarrassments.
That is when I realized that I was not the Incredible Hulk.
But there is a happy ending to this story.
At age 31 -- that's my age now -- in August I took two weeks to re-examine swimming, and question all the of the obvious aspects of swimming.
And went from swimming one lap -- so 20 yards -- like a drowning monkey, at about 200 beats per minute heart rate -- I measured it -- to going to Montauk on Long Island, close to where I grew up, and jumping into the ocean and swimming one kilometer in open water, getting out and feeling better than when I went in.
And I came out, in my Speedos, European style, feeling like the Incredible Hulk.
And that's what I want everyone in here to feel like, the Incredible Hulk, at the end of this presentation.
More specifically, I want you to feel like you're capable of becoming an excellent long-distance swimmer, a world-class language learner, and a tango champion.
And I would like to share my art.
If I have an art, it's deconstructing things that really scare the living hell out of me.
So, moving onward.
Swimming, first principles.
First principles, this is very important.
I find that the best results in life are often held back by false constructs and untested assumptions.
And the turnaround in swimming came when a friend of mine said, "I will go a year without any stimulants" -- this is a six-double-espresso-per-day type of guy -- "if you can complete a one kilometer open water race."
So the clock started ticking.
I started seeking out triathletes because I found that lifelong swimmers often couldn't teach what they did.
I tried kickboards.
My feet would slice through the water like razors, I wouldn't even move. I would leave demoralized, staring at my feet.
Hand paddles, everything.
Even did lessons with Olympians -- nothing helped.
And then Chris Sacca, who is now a dear friend mine, had completed an Iron Man with 103 degree temperature, said, "I have the answer to your prayers."
And he introduced me to the work of a man named Terry Laughlin who is the founder of Total Immersion Swimming.
That set me on the road to examining biomechanics.
So here are the new rules of swimming, if any of you are afraid of swimming, or not good at it.
The first is, forget about kicking. Very counterintuitive.
So it turns out that propulsion isn't really the problem.
Kicking harder doesn't solve the problem because the average swimmer only transfers about three percent of their energy expenditure into forward motion.
The problem is hydrodynamics.
So what you want to focus on instead is allowing your lower body to draft behind your upper body, much like a small car behind a big car on the highway.
And you do that by maintaining a horizontal body position.
The only way you can do that is to not swim on top of the water.
The body is denser than water. 95 percent of it would be, at least, submerged naturally.
So you end up, number three, not swimming, in the case of freestyle, on your stomach, as many people think, reaching on top of the water.
But actually rotating from streamlined right to streamlined left, maintaining that fuselage position as long as possible.
So let's look at some examples. This is Terry.
And you can see that he's extending his right arm below his head and far in front.
And so his entire body really is underwater.
The arm is extended below the head.
The head is held in line with the spine, so that you use strategic water pressure to raise your legs up -- very important, especially for people with lower body fat.
Here is an example of the stroke.
So you don't kick. But you do use a small flick.
You can see this is the left extension.
Then you see his left leg.
Small flick, and the only purpose of that is to rotate his hips so he can get to the opposite side.
And the entry point for his right hand -- notice this, he's not reaching in front and catching the water.
Rather, he is entering the water at a 45-degree angle with his forearm, and then propelling himself by streamlining -- very important.
Incorrect, above, which is what almost every swimming coach will teach you.
Not their fault, honestly.
And I'll get to implicit versus explicit in a moment.
Below is what most swimmers will find enables them to do what I did, which is going from 21 strokes per 20-yard length to 11 strokes in two workouts with no coach, no video monitoring.
And now I love swimming. I can't wait to go swimming.
I'll be doing a swimming lesson later, for myself, if anyone wants to join me.
Last thing, breathing. A problem a lot of us have, certainly, when you're swimming.
In freestyle, easiest way to remedy this is to turn with body roll, and just to look at your recovery hand as it enters the water.
And that will get you very far.
That's it. That's really all you need to know.
Languages. Material versus method.
I, like many people, came to the conclusion that I was terrible at languages.
I suffered through Spanish for junior high, first year of high school, and the sum total of my knowledge was pretty much, "Donde esta el bano?"
And I wouldn't even catch the response. A sad state of affairs.
Then I transferred to a different school sophomore year, and I had a choice of other languages. Most of my friends were taking Japanese.
So I thought why not punish myself? I'll do Japanese.
Six months later I had the chance to go to Japan.
My teachers assured me, they said, "Don't worry.
You'll have Japanese language classes every day to help you cope.
It will be an amazing experience." My first overseas experience in fact.
So my parents encouraged me to do it. I left.
I arrived in Tokyo. Amazing.
I couldn't believe I was on the other side of the world.
I met my host family. Things went quite well I think, all things considered.
My first evening, before my first day of school, I said to my mother, very politely, "Please wake me up at eight a.m."
So, (Japanese) But I didn't say (Japanese). I said, (Japanese). Pretty close.
But I said, "Please rape me at eight a.m."
(Laughter) You've never seen a more confused Japanese woman.
(Laughter) I walked in to school.
And a teacher came up to me and handed me a piece of paper.
I couldn't read any of it -- hieroglyphics, it could have been -- because it was Kanji, Chinese characters adapted into the Japanese language.
Asked him what this said.
And he goes, "Ahh, okay okay, eehto, World History, ehh, Calculus, Traditional Japanese." And so on.
And so it came to me in waves.
There had been something lost in translation.
The Japanese classes were not Japanese instruction classes, per se.
They were the normal high school curriculum for Japanese students -- the other 4,999 students in the school, who were Japanese, besides the American.
And that's pretty much my response.
(Laughter) And that set me on this panic driven search for the perfect language method.
I tried everything. I went to Kinokuniya.
I tried every possible book, every possible CD.
Nothing worked until I found this.
This is the Joyo Kanji. This is a Tablet rather, or a poster of the 1,945 common-use characters as determined by the Ministry of Education in 1981.
Many of the publications in Japan limit themselves to these characters, to facilitate literacy -- some are required to.
And this became my Holy Grail, my Rosetta Stone.
As soon as I focused on this material, I took off.
I ended up being able to read Asahi Shinbu, Asahi newspaper, about six months later -- so a total of 11 months later -- and went from Japanese I to Japanese VI.
Ended up doing translation work at age 16 when I returned to the U.S., and have continued to apply this material over method approach to close to a dozen languages now.
Someone who was terrible at languages, and at any given time, speak, read and write five or six.
This brings us to the point, which is, it's oftentimes what you do, not how you do it, that is the determining factor.
This is the difference between being effective -- doing the right things -- and being efficient -- doing things well whether or not they're important.
You can also do this with grammar.
I came up with these six sentences after much experimentation.
Having a native speaker allow you to deconstruct their grammar, by translating these sentences into past, present, future, will show you subject, object, verb, placement of indirect, direct objects, gender and so forth.
From that point, you can then, if you want to, acquire multiple languages, alternate them so there is no interference.
We can talk about that if anyone in interested.
And now I love languages.
So ballroom dancing, implicit versus explicit -- very important.
You might look at me and say, "That guy must be a ballroom dancer."
But no, you'd be wrong because my body is very poorly designed for most things -- pretty well designed for lifting heavy rocks perhaps.
I used to be much bigger, much more muscular.
And so I ended up walking like this.
I looked a lot like an orangutan, our close cousins, or the Incredible Hulk.
Not very good for ballroom dancing.
I found myself in Argentina in 2005, decided to watch a tango class -- had no intention of participating.
Went in, paid my ten pesos, walked up -- 10 women two guys, usually a good ratio.
The instructor says, "You are participating."
Immediately: death sweat.
(Laughter) Fight-or-flight fear sweat, because I tried ballroom dancing in college -- stepped on the girl's foot with my heel. She screamed.
I was so concerned with her perception of what I was doing, that it exploded in my face, never to return to the ballroom dancing club.
She comes up, and this was her approach, the teacher.
"Okay, come on, grab me."
Gorgeous assistant instructor.
She was very pissed off that I had pulled her from her advanced practice.
So I did my best. I didn't know where to put my hands.
And she pulled back, threw down her arms, put them on her hips, turned around and yelled across the room, "This guy is built like a god-damned mountain of muscle, and he's grabbing me like a fucking Frenchman," (Laughter) which I found encouraging.
(Laughter) Everyone burst into laughter. I was humiliated.
She came back. She goes, "Come on. I don't have all day."
As someone who wrestled since age eight, I proceeded to crush her, "Of Mice and Men" style.
And she looked up and said, "Now that's better."
So I bought a month's worth of classes.
(Laughter) And proceeded to look at -- I wanted to set competition so I'd have a deadline -- Parkinson's Law, the perceived complexity of a task will expand to fill the time you allot it.
So I had a very short deadline for a competition.
I got a female instructor first, to teach me the female role, the follow, because I wanted to understand the sensitivities and abilities that the follow needed to develop, so I wouldn't have a repeat of college.
And then I took an inventory of the characteristics, along with her, of the of the capabilities and elements of different dancers who'd won championships.
I interviewed these people because they all taught in Buenos Aires.
I compared the two lists, and what you find is that there is explicitly, expertise they recommended, certain training methods.
Then there were implicit commonalities that none of them seemed to be practicing.
Now the protectionism of Argentine dance teachers aside, I found this very interesting. So I decided to focus on three of those commonalities.
Long steps. So a lot of milongueros -- the tango dancers will use very short steps.
I found that longer steps were much more elegant.
So you can have -- and you can do it in a very small space in fact.
Secondly, different types of pivots.
Thirdly, variation in tempo.
These seemed to be the three areas that I could exploit to compete if I wanted to comptete against people who'd been practicing for 20 to 30 years.
That photo is of the semi-finals of the Buenos Aires championships, four months later.
Then one month later, went to the world championships, made it to the semi-final. And then set a world record, following that, two weeks later.
I want you to see part of what I practiced.
I'm going to jump forward here.
This is the instructor that Alicia and I chose for the male lead.
His name is Gabriel Misse.
One of the most elegant dancers of his generation, known for his long steps, and his tempo changes and his pivots.
Alicia, in her own right, very famous.
So I think you'll agree, they look quite good together.
Now what I like about this video is it's actually a video of the first time they ever danced together because of his lead. He had a strong lead.
He didn't lead with his chest, which requires you lean forward.
I couldn't develop the attributes in my toes, the strength in my feet, to do that.
So he uses a lead that focuses on his shoulder girdle and his arm.
So he can lift the woman to break her, for example.
That's just one benefit of that.
So then we broke it down.
This would be an example of one pivot.
This is a back step pivot.
There are many different types.
I have hundreds of hours of footage -- all categorized, much like George Carlin categorized his comedy.
So using my arch-nemesis, Spanish, no less, to learn tango.
So fear is your friend. Fear is an indicator.
Sometimes it shows you what you shouldn't do.
More often than not it shows you exactly what you should do.
And the best results that I've had in life, the most enjoyable times, have all been from asking a simple question: what's the worst that can happen?
Especially with fears you gained when you were a child.
Take the analytical frameworks, the capabilities you have, apply them to old fears.
Apply them to very big dreams.
And when I think of what I fear now, it's very simple.
When I imagine my life, what my life would have been like without the educational opportunities that I had, it makes me wonder.
I've spent the last two years trying to deconstruct the American public school system, to either fix it or replace it.
And have done experiments with about 50,000 students thus far -- built, I'd say, about a half dozen schools, my readers, at this point.
And if any of you are interested in that, I would love to speak with you.
I know nothing. I'm a beginner.
But I ask a lot of questions, and I would love your advice.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
It's pretty simple. There are nine, sort of, rules that I discovered after 35 years of rock climbing.
Most of them are pretty basic.
Number one: don't let go -- very sure success method.
But really, truly -- often you think about letting go way before your body does.
So hang in there, and you come up with some pretty peculiar solutions.
Number two: hesitation is bad.
This is a friction climb, up in Tuolumne Meadows, in the Yosemite high country.
Friction climbing doesn't have any sort of hard positive edges.
You're climbing on little dimples and nubbins in the rock.
The most friction you have is when you first put your hand or your foot on the rock.
And then from that point on, you're basically falling.
So momentum is good. Don't stop.
Rule number three: have a plan.
This is a climb called the Naked Edge, in El Dorado Canyon, outside of Boulder.
This climber is on the last pitch of it.
He's actually right about where I fell.
There is about 1,000 feet of air below him.
And all the hard pitches are actually below him.
Often what happens is you're planning so hard for like, "How do I get through the hardest part? How do I get through the hardest part?"
And then what happens?
You get to the last pitch. It's easy.
And you're completely flamed out. Don't do it.
You have to plan ahead to get to the top.
But you also can't forget that each individual move you have to be able to complete.
This is a climb called the Dike Route, on Pywjack Dome, up in the Yosemite high country.
The interesting thing about this climb is it's not that hard.
But if you're the leader on it, at the hardest move, you're looking at about 100 foot fall, onto some low angle slabs.
So you've got to focus.
You don't want to stop in the middle like Coleridge's Kubla Kahn.
You've got to keep going.
Rule number five: know how to rest.
It's amazing. The best climbers are the ones that in the most extreme situations can get their bodies into some position where they can rest, regroup, calm themselves, focus, and keep going.
This is a climb in the Needles, again in California.
Fear really sucks because what it means is you're not focusing on what you're doing.
You're focusing on the consequences of failing at what you're doing because any given move should require all your concentration and thought processes to execute it effectively.
One of the things in climbing is, most people sort of take it straight on. And they follow the most obvious solution.
This is the Devils Tower in Wyoming, which is a columnar basalt formation that most of you probably know from "Close Encounters."
With this, typically crack climbers would put their hands in and their toes in and just start climbing.
The cracks are too small to get your toes into so the only way to climb is using your fingertips in the cracks, and using opposing pressure and forcing yourself up.
Rule number eight: strength doesn't always equal success.
In the 35 years I've been a climbing guide and taught on indoor walls, and stuff like that, the most important thing I've learned was, guys will always try to do pull-ups.
Beginning guys, it's like, they thrash, they thrash, they get 15 feet up -- and they can do about 15 pull-ups right -- And then they just flame out.
Women are much more in balance because they don't have that idea that they're going to be able to do 100 pull-ups.
They think about how to get the weight over their feet because it's sort of natural -- they carry you all day long.
So balance is really critical, and keeping your weight on your feet, which is your strongest muscle.
And of course there is rule number nine.
I came up with rule number nine after I actually didn't plan for a fall, and went about 40 feet and cracked a rib.
Once you get to that point where you know it's going to happen, you need to start thinking about how you're going to let go because that is the critical piece of not getting hurt -- how you're going to fall onto the rope, or if you're climbing without a rope, fall to a place where you can actually control the fall.
So don't hang on till the bitter end.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm here today, as June said, to talk about a project that my twin sister and I have been doing for the past three and half years.
We're crocheting a coral reef.
And it's a project that we've actually been now joined by hundreds of people around the world, who are doing it with us. Indeed thousands of people have actually been involved in this project, in many of its different aspects.
It's a project that now reaches across three continents, and its roots go into the fields of mathematics, marine biology, feminine handicraft and environmental activism.
It's true.
It's also a project that in a very beautiful way, the development of this has actually paralleled the evolution of life on earth, which is a particularly lovely thing to be saying right here in February 2009 -- which, as one of our previous speakers told us, is the 200th anniversary of the birth of Charles Darwin.
All of this I'm going to get to in the next 18 minutes, I hope.
But let me first begin by showing you some pictures of what this thing looks like.
Just to give you an idea of scale, that installation there is about six feet across, and the tallest models are about two or three feet high.
This is some more images of it.
That one on the right is about five feet high.
The work involves hundreds of different crochet models.
And indeed there are now thousands and thousands of models that people have contributed all over the world as part of this.
The totality of this project involves tens of thousands of hours of human labor -- 99 percent of it done by women.
On the right hand side, that bit there is part of an installation that is about 12 feet long.
My sister and I started this project in 2005 because in that year, at least in the science press, there was a lot of talk about global warming, and the effect that global warming was having on coral reefs.
Corals are very delicate organisms, and they are devastated by any rise in sea temperatures.
It causes these vast bleaching events that are the first signs of corals of being sick.
And if the bleaching doesn't go away -- if the temperatures don't go down -- reefs start to die.
A great deal of this has been happening in the Great Barrier Reef, particularly in coral reefs all over the world.
This is our invocation in crochet of a bleached reef.
We have a new organization together called The Institute for Figuring, which is a little organization we started to promote, to do projects about the aesthetic and poetic dimensions of science and mathematics.
And I went and put a little announcement up on our site, asking for people to join us in this enterprise.
To our surprise, one of the first people who called was the Andy Warhol Museum.
And they said they were having an exhibition about artists' response to global warming, and they'd like our coral reef to be part of it.
I laughed and said, "Well we've only just started it, you can have a little bit of it."
So in 2007 we had an exhibition, a small exhibition of this crochet reef.
And then some people in Chicago came along and they said, "In late 2007, the theme of the Chicago Humanities Festival is global warming. And we've got this 3,000 square-foot gallery and we want you to fill it with your reef."
And I, naively by this stage, said, "Oh, yes, sure."
Now I say "naively" because actually my profession is as a science writer.
What I do is I write books about the cultural history of physics.
I've written books about the history of space, the history of physics and religion, and I write articles for people like the New York Times and the L.A. Times.
So I had no idea what it meant to fill a 3,000 square-foot gallery.
So I said yes to this proposition.
And I went home, and I told my sister Christine.
And she nearly had a fit because Christine is a professor at one of L.A.'s major art colleges, CalArts, and she knew exactly what it meant to fill a 3,000 square-foot gallery.
She thought I'd gone off my head.
But she went into crochet overdrive.
And to cut a long story short, eight months later we did fill the Chicago Cultural Center's 3,000 square foot gallery.
By this stage the project had taken on a viral dimension of its own, which got completely beyond us.
The people in Chicago decided that as well as exhibiting our reefs, what they wanted to do was have the local people there make a reef.
So we went and taught the techniques. We did workshops and lectures.
And the people in Chicago made a reef of their own.
And it was exhibited alongside ours.
There were hundreds of people involved in that.
We got invited to do the whole thing in New York, and in London, and in Los Angeles.
In each of these cities, the local citizens, hundreds and hundreds of them, have made a reef.
And more and more people get involved in this, most of whom we've never met.
So the whole thing has sort of morphed into this organic, ever-evolving creature, that's actually gone way beyond Christine and I.
Now some of you are sitting here thinking, "What planet are these people on?
Why on earth are you crocheting a reef?
Woolenness and wetness aren't exactly two concepts that go together.
Why not chisel a coral reef out of marble?
Cast it in bronze."
But it turns out there is a very good reason why we are crocheting it because many organisms in coral reefs have a very particular kind of structure.
The frilly crenulated forms that you see in corals, and kelps, and sponges and nudibranchs, is a form of geometry known as hyperbolic geometry.
And the only way that mathematicians know how to model this structure is with crochet. It happens to be a fact.
It's almost impossible to model this structure any other way, and it's almost impossible to do it on computers.
So what is this hyperbolic geometry that corals and sea slugs embody?
The next few minutes is, we're all going to get raised up to the level of a sea slug.
(Laughter) This sort of geometry revolutionized mathematics when it was first discovered in the 19th century.
But not until 1997 did mathematicians actually understand how they could model it.
In 1997 a mathematician at Cornell, Daina Taimina, made the discovery that this structure could actually be done in knitting and crochet.
The first one she did was knitting.
But you get too many stitches on the needle. So she quickly realized crochet was the better thing.
But what she was doing was actually making a model of a mathematical structure, that many mathematicians had thought it was actually impossible to model.
And indeed they thought that anything like this structure was impossible per se.
Some of the best mathematicians spent hundreds of years trying to prove that this structure was impossible.
So what is this impossible hyperbolic structure?
Before hyperbolic geometry, mathematicians knew about two kinds of space: Euclidean space, and spherical space.
And they have different properties.
Mathematicians like to characterize things by being formalist.
You all have a sense of what a flat space is, Euclidean space is.
But mathematicians formalize this in a particular way.
And what they do is, they do it through the concept of parallel lines.
So here we have a line and a point outside the line.
And Euclid said, "How can I define parallel lines?
I ask the question, how many lines can I draw through the point but never meet the original line?"
And you all know the answer. Does someone want to shout it out?
One. Great. Okay.
That's our definition of a parallel line.
It's a definition really of Euclidean space.
But there is another possibility that you all know of: spherical space.
Think of the surface of a sphere -- just like a beach ball, the surface of the Earth.
I have a straight line on my spherical surface.
And I have a point outside the line. How many straight lines can I draw through the point but never meet the original line?
What do we mean to talk about a straight line on a curved surface?
Now mathematicians have answered that question.
They've understood there is a generalized concept of straightness, it's called a geodesic.
And on the surface of a sphere, a straight line is the biggest possible circle you can draw.
So it's like the equator or the lines of longitude.
So we ask the question again, "How many straight lines can I draw through the point, but never meet the original line?"
Does someone want to guess?
Zero. Very good.
Now mathematicians thought that was the only alternative.
It's a bit suspicious isn't it? There is two answers to the question so far, Zero and one.
Two answers? There may possibly be a third alternative.
To a mathematician if there are two answers, and the first two are zero and one, there is another number that immediately suggests itself as the third alternative.
Does anyone want to guess what it is?
Infinity. You all got it right. Exactly.
There is, there's a third alternative.
This is what it looks like.
There's a straight line, and there is an infinite number of lines that go through the point and never meet the original line.
This is the drawing.
This nearly drove mathematicians bonkers because, like you, they're sitting there feeling bamboozled.
Thinking, how can that be? You're cheating. The lines are curved.
But that's only because I'm projecting it onto a flat surface.
Mathematicians for several hundred years had to really struggle with this.
How could they see this?
What did it mean to actually have a physical model that looked like this?
It's a bit like this: imagine that we'd only ever encountered Euclidean space.
Then our mathematicians come along and said, "There's this thing called a sphere, and the lines come together at the north and south pole."
But you don't know what a sphere looks like.
And someone that comes along and says, "Look here's a ball."
And you go, "Ah! I can see it. I can feel it.
I can touch it. I can play with it."
And that's exactly what happened when Daina Taimina in 1997, showed that you could crochet models in hyperbolic space.
Here is this diagram in crochetness.
I've stitched Euclid's parallel postulate on to the surface.
And the lines look curved.
But look, I can prove to you that they're straight because I can take any one of these lines, and I can fold along it.
And it's a straight line.
So here, in wool, through a domestic feminine art, is the proof that the most famous postulate in mathematics is wrong.
(Applause) And you can stitch all sorts of mathematical theorems onto these surfaces.
The discovery of hyperbolic space ushered in the field of mathematics that is called non-Euclidean geometry.
And this is actually the field of mathematics that underlies general relativity and is actually ultimately going to show us about the shape of the universe.
So there is this direct line between feminine handicraft, Euclid and general relativity.
Now, I said that mathematicians thought that this was impossible.
Here's two creatures who've never heard of Euclid's parallel postulate -- didn't know it was impossible to violate, and they're simply getting on with it.
They've been doing it for hundreds of millions of years.
I once asked the mathematicians why it was that mathematicians thought this structure was impossible when sea slugs have been doing it since the Silurian age.
Their answer was interesting.
They said, "Well I guess there aren't that many mathematicians sitting around looking at sea slugs."
And that's true. But it also goes deeper than that.
It also says a whole lot of things about what mathematicians thought mathematics was, what they thought it could and couldn't do, what they thought it could and couldn't represent.
Even mathematicians, who in some sense are the freest of all thinkers, literally couldn't see not only the sea slugs around them, but the lettuce on their plate -- because lettuces, and all those curly vegetables, they also are embodiments of hyperbolic geometry.
And so in some sense they literally, they had such a symbolic view of mathematics, they couldn't actually see what was going on on the lettuce in front of them.
It turns out that the natural world is full of hyperbolic wonders.
And so, too, we've discovered that there is an infinite taxonomy of crochet hyperbolic creatures.
We started out, Chrissy and I and our contributors, doing the simple mathematically perfect models.
But we found that when we deviated from the specific setness of the mathematical code that underlies it -- the simple algorithm crochet three, increase one -- when we deviated from that and made embellishments to the code, the models immediately started to look more natural.
And all of our contributors, who are an amazing collection of people around the world, do their own embellishments.
As it were, we have this ever-evolving, crochet taxonomic tree of life.
Just as the morphology and the complexity of life on earth is never ending, little embellishments and complexifications in the DNA code lead to new things like giraffes, or orchids -- so too, do little embellishments in the crochet code lead to new and wondrous creatures in the evolutionary tree of crochet life.
So this project really has taken on this inner organic life of its own.
There is the totality of all the people who have come to it.
And their individual visions, and their engagement with this mathematical mode.
We have these technologies. We use them.
But why? What's at stake here? What does it matter?
For Chrissy and I, one of the things that's important here is that these things suggest the importance and value of embodied knowledge.
We live in a society that completely tends to valorize symbolic forms of representation -- algebraic representations, equations, codes.
We live in a society that's obsessed with presenting information in this way, teaching information in this way.
But through this sort of modality, crochet, other plastic forms of play -- people can be engaged with the most abstract, high-powered, theoretical ideas, the kinds of ideas that normally you have to go to university departments to study in higher mathematics, which is where I first learned about hyperbolic space.
But you can do it through playing with material objects.
One of the ways that we've come to think about this is that what we're trying to do with the Institute for Figuring and projects like this, we're trying to have kindergarten for grown-ups.
And kindergarten was actually a very formalized system of education, established by a man named Friedrich Froebel, who was a crystallographer in the 19th century.
He believed that the crystal was the model for all kinds of representation.
He developed a radical alternative system of engaging the smallest children with the most abstract ideas through physical forms of play.
And he is worthy of an entire talk on his own right.
The value of education is something that Froebel championed, through plastic modes of play.
We live in a society now where we have lots of think tanks, where great minds go to think about the world.
They write these great symbolic treatises called books, and papers, and op-ed articles.
We want to propose, Chrissy and I, through The Institute for Figuring, another alternative way of doing things, which is the play tank.
And the play tank, like the think tank, is a place where people can go and engage with great ideas.
But what we want to propose, is that the highest levels of abstraction, things like mathematics, computing, logic, etc. -- all of this can be engaged with, not just through purely cerebral algebraic symbolic methods, but by literally, physically playing with ideas.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
A few months ago we posed a challenge to our community.
We asked everyone: given a range of integers from 0 to 100, guess the whole number closest to 2/3 of the average of all numbers guessed.
So if the average of all guesses is 60, the correct guess will be 40.
What number do you think was the correct guess at 2/3 of the average?
Lets see if we can try and reason our way to the answer.
This game is played under conditions known to game theorists as common knowledge.
Not only does every player have the same information  they also know that everyone else does, and that everyone else knows that everyone else does, and so on, infinitely.
Now, the highest possible average would occur if every person guessed 100.
In that case, 2/3 of the average would be 66.66.
Since everyone can figure this out, it wouldnt make sense to guess anything higher than 67.
If everyone playing comes to this same conclusion, no one will guess higher than 67.
Now 67 is the new highest possible average, so no reasonable guess should be higher than  of that, which is 44.
This logic can be extended further and further.
With each step, the highest possible logical answer keeps getting smaller.
So it would seem sensible to guess the lowest number possible.
And indeed, if everyone chose zero, the game would reach whats known as a Nash Equilibrium.
This is a state where every player has chosen the best possible strategy for themselves given everyone else playing, and no individual player can benefit by choosing differently.
But, thats not what happens in the real world.
People, as it turns out, either arent perfectly rational, or dont expect each other to be perfectly rational.
Or, perhaps, its some combination of the two.
When this game is played in real-world settings, the average tends to be somewhere between 20 and 35.
Danish newspaper Politiken ran the game with over 19,000 readers participating, resulting in an average of roughly 22, making the correct answer 14.
For our audience, the average was 31.3.
So if you guessed 21 as 2/3 of the average, well done.
Economic game theorists have a way of modeling this interplay between rationality and practicality called k-level reasoning.
K stands for the number of times a cycle of reasoning is repeated.
A person playing at k-level 0 would approach our game naively, guessing a number at random without thinking about the other players.
At k-level 1, a player would assume everyone else was playing at level 0, resulting in an average of 50, and thus guess 33.
At k-level 2, theyd assume that everyone else was playing at level 1, leading them to guess 22.
It would take 12 k-levels to reach 0.
The evidence suggests that most people stop at 1 or 2 k-levels.
And thats useful to know, because k-level thinking comes into play in high-stakes situations.
For example, stock traders evaluate stocks not only based on earnings reports, but also on the value that others place on those numbers.
And during penalty kicks in soccer, both the shooter and the goalie decide whether to go right or left based on what they think the other person is thinking.
Goalies often memorize the patterns of their opponents ahead of time, but penalty shooters know that and can plan accordingly.
In each case, participants must weigh their own understanding of the best course of action against how well they think other participants understand the situation.
But 1 or 2 k-levels is by no means a hard and fast rule simply being conscious of this tendency can make people adjust their expectations.
For instance, what would happen if people played the 2/3 game after understanding the difference between the most logical approach and the most common?
Submit your own guess at what 2/3 of the new average will be by using the form below, and well find out.
Shah Rukh Khan: Courage, determination, and a single-minded vision.
These are the qualities the biggest achievers have in common.
These are those brave hearts for whom failure is not an option.
What looks to us an unconquerable sea, to our next speaker is an irresistible stage she was born to perform on.
So let's dive straight into the story of our fearless speaker, Bhakti Sharma, who's making waves in the world of long-distance swimming.
Bhakti Sharma.
(Applause) Bhakti Sharma: Imagine, in the scorching Rajasthan heat, on a hot summer afternoon, a two-and-a-half-year-old riding on a moped behind her mom, not knowing where they were headed.
And 20 minutes later, that two-and-a-half-year-old finds herself completely submerged in water.
Before I knew it, I would be kicking, splashing, screaming, gulping down water, holding onto my mom for my dear life.
That's how I learned how to swim.
I started pool-swimming when I was two and a half, and open water swimming when I was 14 years old.
And so I have given over 25 years of my life to this sport, during which I have swum in all five oceans of the world, crossed the English Channel -- which is also known as the Mount Everest of swimming -- and set a world record in the freezing Antarctic ocean.
(Applause) When you spend so much time with a sport, it ceases to be just that and becomes a mirror.
And that shows who you really are.
You see that your mettle as an athlete is not only tested on race day but every single day, when the sport demands that you get up at 4:30 in the morning, swim for two hours, go to school, come back, swim for three hours, go home, eat and sleep.
When you win a medal or set a world record, this mirror shows the happiness that you and your loved ones feel, but also reflects the tears that you shed all by yourself, alone in the water.
Open water swimming is a very lonely sport.
I have spent hours looking into the infinite, seemingly bottomless ocean underneath me, with nothing to keep me company but my own thoughts.
And so, I have not only been tested as a swimmer but also as a thinking, feeling, imaginative human being.
Be it my first test as a marathon swimmer, when I decided to swim for 12 hours non-stop in a swimming pool or crossing the English Channel in 13 hours and 55 minutes.
When you're swimming, you don't talk, you don't hear very well, and your vision is restricted to what's right in front of you or underneath you.
This isolation has been my sport's biggest gift to me.
Through open water swimming, I have come to know myself in ways that I could have never expected to.
I remember, at the age of 14, when I jumped into an ocean for the first time for a swim, and throughout this swim, the waves were picking me up and throwing me down, I saw the child in me, who enjoys such adventures.
While crossing the English Channel, after already having swam for 10 hours, when I got stuck in one place for one and a half hour because of the currents, I saw the strong and dedicated athlete in me, who did not want to disappoint her parents or her country.
In an open water marathon held in Switzerland, when I won my first gold medal for India -- (Applause) I witnessed a proud Indian in me.
While crossing the English Channel again, this time in a relay with my mother, not knowing that we were creating history, I saw the protective daughter in me, who just wanted to see her mom fulfill her own dreams.
And four years ago, when I jumped into the Antarctic Ocean, wearing nothing but a swimsuit, cap and goggles, with an unwavering spirit of just doing, I saw a fighter in me.
When I jumped into that zero-to-one-degree-Celsius water, I realized that I had prepared my body and mind for the cold, but what I wasn't prepared for was the density of the water.
Every stroke felt like pulling through oil.
And in the first five minutes, I had that paralyzing thought of just giving up.
How nice it would be to just forget about all this, get on the boat, stand underneath the hot shower or wrap myself in a warm blanket?
But with that thought, also came a stronger, a more willful voice from deep within.
"You know you have it in you to just take one more stroke."
So I lifted my arm and took a stroke.
"Now one more."
So I took a second and a third stroke.
By the fourth one, I saw a penguin swimming underneath my stomach.
It came up to my left and started swimming with me.
"See? A penguin is cheering you on," said that voice within.
(Applause and cheers) I looked up to my people on the boat.
They had the same smile on their faces that I had on mine.
The same smile that we all have when we are stuck in a difficult situation and we see a ray of hope.
We take it as a sign from destiny, and we just keep pushing forward.
Just as I did, and 41 minutes later, set the world record for swimming the longest distance in the Antarctic Ocean.
(Applause) Imagine, it doesn't even snow in Rajasthan.
(Laughter) That voice, which has accompanied me through all my difficult situations throughout my swims, would have never shown itself if I had not spent so much time alone, had not paid attention to every single thought that crossed my mind.
When you find yourself alone in an ocean, with your thoughts, the dangers that you face are not just external, like whales, sharks, jellyfish or even demotivating people.
But the more dangerous demons you face are the fear and negativity inside you that tell you, "You're not good enough.
You will never reach the other shore.
You haven't trained enough.
What if you fail? What will people think?
I'm sure everybody is thinking right now how slow you are."
We all have our own internal demons, don't we?
In a day-to-day life, you can hide from them, behind your work or many other distractions.
But like I said, in the middle of the ocean, there is nowhere to hide.
I have to face my internal demons, just as much as I have to taste the salt in the sea, feel the chafing on my skin, and acknowledge the whales swimming beside me.
I hate it, and I love it.
I hate it because this sport shows me the side of myself that I don't want to believe exists.
The side of me that is human and not perfect.
Like the part of me that can't get out of bed in the morning and make it to practice.
The side of me that gets so burned out, so tired, that just wants to quit swimming.
But I also love it, because this sport has given me moments that I can look back on when I feel unmotivated.
And they bring me to my knees, because I feel so grateful.
Many of you may not spend hours swimming non-stop.
But who do you spend the most amount of your time with?
You may share your external space with many others, but there is one constant companion that you all have: you.
And yet, most of us may never come to knowing who we really are.
I'm a daughter, an Indian, a swimmer, a student.
But I am so much more.
If you are not investing in yourself, not setting a path that brings you closer to you, no amount of "success" in life can bring you lasting joy or satisfaction.
Even today, when I can't find motivation or joy in what I'm doing, all I ask myself is, "Is this the best I can do right now?"
And the meaning of my "best" changes.
On some days, it means not giving up, continuing to swim in freezing water and setting a world record.
But on many other days, it means getting over my depressing thoughts, stepping out of the house and being able to do the daily chores.
What does not change is that voice within.
That internal compass which guides me to a better self every day.
And I believe that a truly successful life is the one which is spent in the pursuit of becoming the best possible version of yourself when you take that last breath.
Thank you.
(Applause) SRK: I think the only sport I can't do is swim -- I sink like a rock.
So standing next to the world's best swimmer makes me kind of feel -- if you can excuse my pun -- kind of at sea.
But -- BS: (Laughs) No pun intended, of course.
SRK: But what is your next goal as a swimmer?
BS: I have a major fear of competition, so what better goal to set than aiming for the Olympics?
Because open water swimming is an Olympic sport now.
(Applause) Even saying it out loud gives me shivers, because it's such a huge goal that I don't want to accept that I have set that goal, but that's the thrill of it, that's the part of it.
And my idea is that if I make it to the Olympics or I don't make it, that doesn't matter, but in the process of training for it, I will have become a better swimmer and a better person.
SRK: Inshallah, you will make it to the Olympics.
And I want to tell you a lot of people who are watching this show at home, there's lots of people, all of whom are thinking only positively for you, so when you go for the Olympics, imagine all of us will be wearing our penguin suits and swimming with you, and saying, "Go on, go on, Bhakti, go on, go on."
BS: Can you be my personal penguin?
SRK: I am your penguin now.
It would have been cooler if you said, like, a shark and all, but penguin -- BS: Orcas are my spirit animal, but you can be my orca.
(Applause) SRK: Ladies and gentleman, Bhakti.
BS: Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was five years old I fell in love with airplanes.
Now I'm talking about the '30s.
In the '30s an airplane had two wings and a round motor, and was always flown by a guy who looked like Cary Grant.
He had high leather boots, jodhpurs, an old leather jacket, a wonderful helmet and those marvelous goggles -- and, inevitably, a white scarf, to flow in the wind.
He'd always walk up to his airplane in a kind of saunter, devil-may-care saunter, flick the cigarette away, grab the girl waiting here, give her a kiss.
(Laughter) And then mount his airplane, maybe for the last time.
Of course I always wondered what would happen if he'd kissed the airplane first.
(Laughter) But this was real romance to me.
Everything about flying in those years, which was -- you have to stop and think for a moment -- was probably the most advanced technological thing going on at the time.
So as a youngster, I tried to get close to this by drawing airplanes, constantly drawing airplanes.
It's the way I got a part of this romance.
And of course, in a way, when I say romance, I mean in part the aesthetics of that whole situation.
I think the word is the holistic experience revolving around a product.
The product was that airplane.
But it built a romance.
Even the parts of the airplane had French names.
Ze fuselage, ze empanage, ze nessal.
You know, from a romance language.
So that it was something that just got into your spirit.
It did mine.
And I decided I had to get closer than just drawing fantasy airplanes.
I wanted to build airplanes.
So I built model airplanes.
And I found that in doing the model airplanes the appearance drawings were not enough.
You couldn't transfer those to the model itself.
If you wanted it to fly you had to learn the discipline of flying.
You had to learn about aeronautics.
You had to learn what made an airplane stay in the air.
And of course, as a model in those years, you couldn't control it.
So it had to be self-righting, and stay up without crashing.
So I had to give up the approach of drawing the fantasy shapes and convert it to technical drawings -- the shape of the wing, the shape of the fuselage and so on -- and build an airplane over these drawings that I knew followed some of the principles of flying.
And in so doing, I could produce a model that would fly, stay in the air.
And it had, once it was in the air, some of this romance that I was in love with.
Well the act of drawing airplanes led me to, when I had the opportunity to choose a course in school, led me to sign up for aeronautical engineering.
And when I was sitting in classes -- in which no one asked me to draw an airplane -- to my surprise.
I had to learn mathematics and mechanics and all this sort of thing.
I'd wile away my time drawing airplanes in the class.
One day a young man looked over my shoulder, he said, "You draw very well.
You should be in the art department."
And I said, "Why?"
And he said, "Well for one thing, there are more girls there."
(Laughter) So my romance was temporarily shifted.
(Laughter) And I went into art because they appreciated drawing.
Studied painting; didn't do very well at that.
Went through design, some architecture.
Eventually hired myself out as a designer.
And for the following 25 years, living in Italy, living in America, I doled out a piece of this romance to anybody who'd pay for it -- this sense, this aesthetic feeling, for the experience revolving around a designed object.
And it exists.
Any of you who rode the automobiles -- was it yesterday? -- at the track, you know the romance revolving around those high performance cars.
Well in 25 years I was mostly putting out pieces of this romance and not getting a lot back in because design on call doesn't always connect you with a circumstance in which you can produce things of this nature.
So after 25 years I began to feel as though I was running dry.
And I quit.
And I started up a very small operation -- went from 40 people to one, in an effort to rediscover my innocence.
I wanted to get back where the romance was.
And I couldn't choose airplanes because they had gotten sort of unromantic at that point, even though I'd done a lot of airplane work, on the interiors.
So I chose furniture.
And I chose chairs specifically because I knew something about them.
I'd designed a lot of chairs, over the years for tractors and trucks and submarines -- all kinds of things.
But not office chairs.
So I started doing that.
And I found that there were ways to duplicate the same approach that I used to use on the airplane.
Only this time, instead of the product being shaped by the wind, it was shaped by the human body.
So the discipline was -- as in the airplane you learn a lot about how to deal with the air, for a chair you have to learn a lot about how to deal with the body, and what the body needs, wants, indicates it needs.
And that's the way, ultimately after some ups and downs, I ended up designing the chair I'm going to show you.
I should say one more thing. When I was doing those model airplanes, I did everything.
I conceived the kind of airplane.
I basically engineered it.
I built it.
And I flew it.
And that's the way I work now.
When I started this chair it was not a preconceived notion.
Design nowadays, if you mean it, you don't start with styling sketches.
I started with a lot of loose ideas, roughly eight or nine years ago.
And the loose ideas had something to do with what I knew happened with people in the office, at the work place -- people who worked, and used task seating, a great many of them sitting in front of a computer all day long.
And I felt, the one thing they don't need, is a chair that interferes with their main reason for sitting there.
So I took the approach that the chair should do as much for them as humanly possible or as mechanistically possible so that they didn't have to fuss with it.
So my idea was that, instead of sitting down and reaching for a lot of controls, that you would sit on the chair, and it would automatically balance your weight against the force required to recline.
Now that may not mean a lot to some of you.
But you know most good chairs do recline because it's beneficial to open up this joint between your legs and your upper body for better breathing and better flow.
So that if you sit down on my chair, whether you're five feet tall or six foot six, it always deals with your weight and transfers the amount of force required to recline in a way that you don't have to look for something to adjust.
I'll tell you right up front, this is a trade off.
There are drawbacks to this.
One is: you can't accommodate everybody.
There are some very light people, some extremely heavy people, maybe people with a lot of bulk up top.
They begin to fall off the end of your chart.
But the compromise, I felt, was in my favor because most people don't adjust their chairs.
They will sit in them forever.
I had somebody on the bus out to the racetrack tell me about his sister calling him.
He said she had one of the new, better chairs.
She said, "Oh I love it."
She said, "But it's too high."
(Laughter) So he said, "Well I'll come over and look at it."
He came over and looked at it.
He reached down. He pulled a lever. And the chair sank down.
She said, "Oh it's wonderful. How did you do that?"
And he showed her the lever.
Well, that's typical of a lot of us working in chairs.
And why should you get a 20-page manual about how to run a chair?
(Laughter) I had one for a wristwatch once. 20 pages.
Anyway, I felt that it was important that you didn't have to make an adjustment in order to get this kind of action.
The other thing I felt was that armrests had never really been properly approached from the standpoint of how much of an aid they could be to your work life.
But I felt it was too much to ask to have to adjust each individual armrest in order to get it where you wanted.
So I spent a long time.
I said I worked eight or nine years on it.
And each of these things went along sort of in parallel but incrementally were a problem of their own.
I worked a long time on figuring out how to move the arms over a much greater arc -- that is up and down -- and make them a lot easier, so that you didn't have to use a button.
And so after many trials, many failures, we came up with a very simple arrangement in which we could just move one arm or the other.
And they go up easily.
And stop where you want.
You can put them down, essentially out of the way.
No arms at all.
Or you can pull them up where you want them.
And this was another thing that I felt, while not nearly as romantic as Cary Grant, nevertheless begins to grab a little bit of aesthetic operation, aesthetic performance into a product.
The next area that was of interest to me was the fact that reclining was a very important factor.
And the more you can recline, in a way, the better it is.
The more the angle between here and here opens up -- and nowadays, with a screen in front of you, you don't want to have your eye drop too far in the recline, so we keep it at more or less the same level -- but you transfer weight off your tailbones.
Would everybody put their hand under their bottom and feel their tailbone?
(Laughter) You feel that bone under there?
(Laughter) Just your own.
(Laughter) There's two of them, one on either side.
All the weight of your upper torso -- your arms, your head -- goes right down through your back, your spine, into those bones when you sit.
And that's a lot of load.
Just relieving your arms with armrests takes 20 percent of that load off.
Now that, if your spine is not held in a good position, will help bend your spine the wrong way, and so on.
So to unload that great weight -- if that indeed exists -- you can recline.
When you recline you take away a lot of that load off your bottom end, and transfer it to your back.
At the same time, as I say, you open up this joint.
And breathability is good.
But to do that, if you have any amount of recline, it gets to the point where you need a headrest because nearly always, automatically hold your head in a vertical position, see?
As I recline, my head says more or less vertical.
Well if you're reclined a great deal, you have to use muscle force to hold your head there.
So that's where a headrest comes in.
Now headrest is a challenge because you want it to adjust enough so that it'll fit, you know, a tall guy and a short girl.
So here we are.
I've got five inches of adjustment here in order to get the headrest in the right place.
But then I knew from experience and looking around in offices where there were chairs with headrests that nobody would ever bother to reach back and turn a knob and adjust the headrest to put it in position.
And you need it in a different position when you're upright, then when you're reclined.
So I knew that had to be solved, and had to be automatic.
So if you watch this chair as I recline, the headrest comes up to meet my neck.
Ideally you want to put the head support in the cranial area, right there.
So that part of it took a long time to work out.
And there is a variety of other things: the shape of the cushions, the gel we put.
We stole the idea from bicycle seats, and put gel in the cushions and in the armrests to absorb point load -- distributes the loading so you don't get hard spots.
You cant hit your elbow on bottom.
And I did want to demonstrate the fact that the chair can accommodate people.
While you're sitting in it you can adjust it down for the five-footer, or you can adjust it for the six-foot-six guy -- all within the scope of a few simple adjustments.
(Applause)
While regaling you with daring stories from her youth, it might be hard to believe your grandmother used to be a trapeze artist.
However, the bad backs, elbow pain, and creaky knees so common in older people is more than just old age."
In fact, the source of this stiffness plagues many young people as well.
The culprit is arthritis: a condition that causes inflammation and pain in the joints of over 90 million people in the U.S. alone.
But are stiff, creaky joints really inevitable?
What makes arthritis so pervasive, and why havent we found a cure for this widespread condition?
The first hurdle is that arthritis is actually a spectrum of over 100 different arthritic conditions.
All these conditions share symptoms of joint pain and inflammation, but the origin and severity of those symptoms vary widely.
Even the most common type, osteoarthritis, is trickier to prevent than one might think.
Its a general misconception that arthritis is confined to old age.
The origins of osteoarthritis can often be traced to a patients early life, from any seemingly ordinary joint injury.
Following impact, immune cells rush in to help clean and repair the damaged site and begin pumping out enzymes, including matrix metalloproteinases and aggrecanases.
These enzymes clear out the damaged tissue and contribute to inflammation.
But while this rapid swelling helps protect the joint during recovery, inadequately healed tissue can cause these immune cells to overstay their welcome.
The continuing flood of enzymes starts to degrade the cartilage, weakening the joint and leading to arthritis later on.
Not all forms of arthritis can simply be traced to an old sports injury.
Take rheumatoid arthritis, which affects 1.3 million U.S. adults.
This condition is actually an autoimmune disease in which autoantibodies target natively produced proteins, some of which are secreted by cartilage cells.
We still dont know what causes this behavior, but the result is that the body treats joint tissue like a foreign invader.
Immune cells infiltrate the joint despite there being no tissue damage to repair.
This response leads to chronic inflammation, which destroys bone and cartilage.
Yet another condition, spondyloarthritis, has similarities to both of the conditions weve covered.
Patients experience continuous inflammation in the joints and at the sites where ligaments and tendons attach to bones, even without any initial injury.
This leads to the flood of enzymes and degradation seen in osteoarthritis, but is driven by different inflammatory proteins called cytokines.
As the enzymes eat away at cartilage, the body attempts to stabilize smaller joints by fusing them together.
This process sometimes leads to outgrowths called bone spurs, which also cause intense stiffness and joint pain.
With so many factors causing arthritis, our current treatments are tailored to tackle specific symptoms rather than underlying causes.
These range from promising MACI techniques, which harvest cells from small pieces of cartilage to grow replacement tissue.
To a technique called microfracture, where surgeons create small holes in the bone, allowing bone marrow stem cells to leak out and form new cartilage.
As a last resort, people with withered cartilage can even undergo full joint replacements.
But outside these drastic measures, the underlying drivers of autoimmune arthritis still present a unique treatment challenge.
Scientists are making progress with therapies that block TNF-alpha, one of the primary proteins causing inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis.
But even this approach only treats the symptoms of the condition, not the cause.
In the meantime, some of our best defenses against arthritis are lifestyle choices: maintaining a healthy weight to take pressure off joints, low-impact exercises like yoga or cycling, and avoiding smoking.
These arthritis-fighting behaviors can help us lead longer lives as we continue to research cures and treatments for the huge diversity of arthritic conditions.
I'm an astronaut.
I flew on the space shuttle twice, and I lived on the International Space Station for almost six months.
People often ask me the same question, which is, "What's it like in space?"
as if it was a secret.
Space belongs to all of us, and I'd like to help you understand why it's a place that is magic for all of us.
The day after my 50th birthday, I climbed aboard a Russian capsule, in Russia, and launched into space.
Launching is the most dangerous thing that we do, and it's also the most thrilling.
Three, two, one ... liftoff!
I felt every single bit of the controlled fury of those rocket engines as they blasted us off the Earth.
We went faster and faster and faster, until, after eight and a half minutes, on purpose, those engines stop -- kabunk! -- and we are weightless.
And the mission and the magic begin.
Dmitry and Paolo and I are circling the Earth in our tiny spacecraft, approaching the space station carefully.
It's an intricate dance at 17,500 miles an hour between our capsule, the size of a Smart Car, and the space station, the size of a football field.
We arrive when those two craft dock with a gentle thunk.
We open the hatches, have sloppy zero-G hugs with each other, and now we're six.
We're a space family, an instant family.
My favorite part about living up there was the flying.
I loved it.
It was like being Peter Pan.
It's not about floating.
Just the touch of a finger can actually push you across the entire space station, and then you sort of tuck in with your toes.
One of my favorite things was drifting silently through the space station, which was humming along at night.
I wondered sometimes if it knew I was there, just silent.
But sharing the wonder of that with the crew was also part of what was important to me.
A typical day in space starts with the perfect commute.
I wake up, cruise down the lab and say hello to the best morning view ever.
It's a really fast commute, only 30 seconds, and we never get tired of looking out that window.
I think it reminds us that we're actually still very close to Earth.
Our crew was the second ever to use the Canadian robotic arm to capture a supply ship the size of a school bus containing about a dozen different experiments and the only chocolate that we would see for the next four months.
Now, chocolate aside, every single one of those experiments enables yet one more scientific question answered that we can't do down here on Earth.
And so, it's like a different lens, allowing us to see the answers to questions like, "What about combustion?"
"What about fluid dynamics?"
Now, sleeping is delightful.
My favorite -- I mean, you could be upside down, right side up -- my favorite: curled up in a little ball and floating freely.
Laundry? Nope.
We load our dirty clothes into an empty supply ship and send it off into space.
The bathroom.
Everyone wants to know.
It's hard to understand, so I made a little video, because I wanted kids to understand that the principle of vacuum saves the day and that just a gentle breeze helps everything go where it is supposed to.
Well, in real life it does.
(Laughter) Recycling? Of course.
So we take our urine, we store it, we filter it and then we drink it.
And it's actually delicious.
(Laughter) Sitting around the table, eating food that looks bad but actually tastes pretty good.
But it's the gathering around the table that's important, I think both in space and on Earth, because that's what cements a crew together.
For me, music was a way to stay connected to the rest of the world.
I played a duet between Earth and space with Ian Anderson of Jethro Tull on the 50th anniversary of human spaceflight.
Connecting to family was so important.
I talked with my family almost every day the whole time I was up there, and I would actually read books to my son as a way for us just to be together.
So important.
Now, when the space station would go over Massachusetts, my family would run outside, and they would watch the brightest star sailing across the sky.
And when I looked down, I couldn't see my house, but it meant a lot to me to know that the people I loved the most were looking up while I was looking down.
So the space station, for me, is the place where mission and magic come together.
The mission, the work are vital steps in our quest to go further than our planet and imperative for understanding sustainability here on Earth.
I loved being a part of that, and if I could have taken my family with me, I never would have come home.
And so my view from the station showed me that we are all from the same place.
We all have our roles to play.
Because, the Earth is our ship.
Space is our home.
And we are the crew of Spaceship Earth.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Like a lot of people around the world, earlier this summer my friends and I were obsessed with the Women's World Cup held in France.
Here we are, watching these incredible athletes, the goals were amazing, the games were clean and engaging, and at the same time, outside the field, these women are talking about equal pay, and in the case of some countries, any pay at all for their sport.
So because we were mildly obsessed, we wanted to watch the games live, and we decided that one of the Spanish-speaking networks in the US was the best place for us to start.
And it wasn't until a few games into the tournament that a friend of mine talks to me and says, "Why does it feel like everything I'm seeing is commercials for makeup and household cleaning products and diets?"
It did feel a little bit too obvious, and I don't know if we were sensitive about it or the fact that we were watching with men and boys in our lives, but it did feel a little bit too obvious that we're being targeted for being women.
And to be honest there's nothing necessarily wrong with that.
Someone sat down and looked at the tournament and said, "Well, this thing is likely to be seen by more women, these women are Hispanic because they're watching in Spanish, and this is women content.
Therefore, this is a great place for me to place all these commercials that are female-centric and maybe not other things."
If I think about it as a marketer, I know that I absolutely should not be annoyed about it, because this is what marketers are tasked with doing.
Marketers are tasked with building brands with very limited budget, so there's a little bit of an incentive to categorize people in buckets so they can reach their target faster.
So if you think about this, it's kind of like a shortcut.
They're using gender as a shortcut to get to their target consumer.
The issue is that as logical as that argument seems, gender as a shortcut is actually not great.
In this day and age, if you still blindly use a gender view for your marketing activities, actually it's just plain bad business.
I'm not talking even about the backlash on stereotypes in advertising, which is a very real thing that has to be addressed.
I'm saying it's bad business because you're leaving money on the table for your brands and your products.
Because gender is such an easy thing to find in the market and to target and to talk about, it actually distracts you from the fun things that could be driving growth from your brands and, at the same time, it continues to create separation around genders and perpetuate stereotypes.
So at the same time this activity is bad for your business and bad for society, so double whammy.
And gender is one of those things like other demographics that have historically been good marketing shortcuts.
At some point, however, we forgot that at the core we were targeting needs around cooking and cleaning and personal care and driving and sports and we just made it all a bucket and we said, "Men and women are different."
We got used to it and we never challenged it again, and it's fascinating to me, and by fascinating I mean a little bit insane, that we still talk about this as a segment when it's most likely carryover bias.
In fact, I don't come to this conclusion lightly.
We have enough data to suggest that gender is not the best place to start for you to design and target your brands.
And I would even go one step further: unless you are working in a very gender-specific product category, probably anything else you're hypothesizing about your consumer right now is going to be more useful than gender.
We did not set up to draw this conclusion specifically.
We found it.
As consultants, our job is to go with our clients and understand their business and try to help them find spaces for their brands to grow.
And it is our belief that if you want to find disruptive growth in the market, you have to go to the consumer and take a very agnostic view of the consumer.
You have to go and look at them from scratch, remove yourself from biases and segments that you thought were important, just take a look to see where the growth is.
And we built ourselves an algorithm precisely for that.
So imagine that we have a person and we know a person is making a choice about a product or service, and from this person, I can know their gender, of course, other demographics, where they live, their income, other things.
I know the context where this person is making a decision, where they are, who they're with, the energy, anything, and I can also put other things in the mix.
I can know their attitudes, how they feel about the category, their behaviors.
So if you imagine this kind of blob of big data about a person -- I'm going to oversimplify the science here but we basically built an algorithm for statistical tournaments.
So a statistical tournament is like asking this big thing of data, "So, data, from everything you know about consumers at this point, what is the most useful thing I need to know that tells me more about what consumers need?"
So the tournament is going to have winners and losers.
The winners are those variables, those dimensions, that actually teach you a lot about your consumer, that if you know that, you know what they need.
And there's losing variables that are just not that practical, and this matters because in a world of limited resources, you don't want to waste it on people that actually have the same needs.
So why treat them differently?
So at this point, I know, suspense is not killing you, because I told you what the output is, but what we found over time is after 200 projects around the world -- this is covering 20 countries or more -- in essence we ran about a hundred thousand of these tournaments, and, no surprise, gender was very rarely the most predictive thing to understand consumer needs.
From a hundred thousand tournaments, gender only came out as the winning variable in about five percent of them.
This is true around the world, by the way.
We did this in places where traditional gender roles are a little more pronounced, and the conclusions were exactly the same.
It was a little bit more important, gender, than five percent, but not material.
So let's let that sink in for a second.
No matter how you're looking at a consumer, most likely anything else is going to be more interesting to you than gender.
There's probably something very important you need to know about them, and you're getting distracted because you're doing everything based on gender.
And that's why I say you're leaving money on the table.
Gender is easy. It's easy to design advertising based on gender, it's easy to target people online and on TV based on gender.
But at the end, that's not where the exciting growth will come from.
If you're a food company, for example, it's actually much more interesting to you to know where people are eating, who they are eating with, are they very nutritionally oriented.
All of those things are actually significantly more powerful and useful than knowing if a person is a man or a woman.
And that matters, of course, because then if you're putting your limited budget into action, then you're better off creating solutions for different occasions than trying to target women versus young men.
Another example is alcoholic beverages.
Thirty-five percent to 40 percent of consumption in alcoholic beverages around the world actually happens with women, but, you know, "women don't drink beer."
Those are the things that we typically hear.
But actually, when a man and a woman are, for the most part, in the same location, the emotional and functional needs they have at that moment are very similar.
There's only one exception, by the way, and the exceptions exist, where if you have a man and a woman on a date, the man is trying to impress the woman and the woman is trying to connect with the man, so there's going to be a little bit of tension, but that's important to know.
Financial institutions: that's something where we've heard a lot about the difference between men and women, but actually talking about men and women as different is distracting you from the thing that is underneath.
We made it so simple as "women don't like to invest," "women hate managing their money," "men are great and aggressive and risk-takers," but at the end it's not about men and women.
It is actually a different narrative.
It is about, there are people that are excited and energized and educated to manage their finances versus people that are not.
So if you change the conversation from men and women to actually what's underneath then probably you'll stop being so condescending to women and you may start serving some men that are actually shy about managing their finances.
I'll leave one more example.
If I go back to the women that were playing sport at the beginning, one of the fascinating things we found over different countries, exploring sportswear, that if a person is a competitive person and they are in the moment of action, the needs are not different between a man and a woman.
An athlete is an athlete.
It doesn't matter for men and women, it doesn't matter for old and young, you are an athlete, and in the moment of action and extreme competition, you need this gear to work for you.
So these soccer-playing women have a lot in common with their counterparts.
Out of the field, it doesn't matter.
Out of the field, they may be into fashion, into other things, but on the field, the needs are not different.
So these are just a few examples on categories where we found that gender was not the best place to go, and actually the argument is that at this point it's not even a feminist push, it's just we got used to it.
We got used to using gender, and it's important for us to start finding ways to measure other things about consumers so that we don't revert back to gender.
I am not nave, and I know there's still going to be appetite and certain ease around using gender, but at least this warrants a conversation.
In your business, you have to inquire, is this really the best lens for me to grow.
So, if you are, like me, a person that is in business, that I am constantly worried about what is my role in the broader societal discussions, if you're listening to your business and you hear things like, "Oh, my target are women, my target are men, this goes to young girls, young boys," when it's that gender conversation, unless you are working, again, in a very specific, gender-specific product category, take this as a warning sign, because if you keep having these conversations, you will keep perpetuating stereotypes of people and making people think that men and women are different.
But because this is business, and we're running a business, and we want to grow it, at least kind of challenge your own instinct to use gender, because statistics say that you're probably not choosing the best variable to target your product or service.
Growth is not easy at all.
What makes you think that growth is going to come from going into market with such an outdated lens like gender?
So let's stop doing what's easy and go for what's right.
At this point, it's not just for your business, it's for society.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to talk about the election.
For the first time in the United States, a predominantly white group of voters voted for an African-American candidate for President.
And in fact Barack Obama did quite well.
He won 375 electoral votes.
And he won about 70 million popular votes more than any other presidential candidate -- of any race, of any party -- in history.
If you compare how Obama did against how John Kerry had done four years earlier -- Democrats really like seeing this transition here, where almost every state becomes bluer, becomes more democratic -- even states Obama lost, like out west, those states became more blue.
In the south, in the northeast, almost everywhere but with a couple of exceptions here and there.
One exception is in Massachusetts.
That was John Kerry's home state.
No big surprise, Obama couldn't do better than Kerry there.
Or in Arizona, which is John McCain's home, Obama didn't have much improvement.
But there is also this part of the country, kind of in the middle region here.
This kind of Arkansas, Tennessee, Oklahoma, West Virginia region.
Now if you look at '96, Bill Clinton -- the last Democrat to actually win -- how he did in '96, you see real big differences in this part of the country right here, the kind of Appalachians, Ozarks, highlands region, as I call it: 20 or 30 point swings from how Bill Clinton did in '96 to how Obama did in 2008.
Yes Bill Clinton was from Arkansas, but these are very, very profound differences.
So, when we think about parts of the country like Arkansas, you know.
There is a book written called, "What's the Matter with Kansas?"
But really the question here -- Obama did relatively well in Kansas.
He lost badly but every Democrat does.
He lost no worse than most people do.
But yeah, what's the matter with Arkansas?
(Laughter) And when we think of Arkansas we tend to have pretty negative connotations.
We think of a bunch of rednecks, quote, unquote, with guns.
And we think people like this probably don't want to vote for people who look like this and are named Barack Obama.
We think it's a matter of race. And is this fair?
Are we kind of stigmatizing people from Arkansas, and this part of the country?
And the answer is: it is at least partially fair.
We know that race was a factor, and the reason why we know that is because we asked those people.
Actually we didn't ask them, but when they conducted exit polls in every state, in 37 states, out of the 50, they asked a question, that was pretty direct, about race.
They asked this question.
In deciding your vote for President today, was the race of the candidate a factor?
We're looking for people that said, "Yes, race was a factor; moreover it was an important factor, in my decision," and people who voted for John McCain as a result of that factor, maybe in combination with other factors, and maybe alone.
We're looking for this behavior among white voters or, really, non-black voters.
So you see big differences in different parts of the country on this question.
In Louisiana, about one in five white voters said, "Yes, one of the big reasons why I voted against Barack Obama is because he was an African-American."
If those people had voted for Obama, even half of them, Obama would have won Louisiana safely.
Same is true with, I think, all of these states you see on the top of the list.
Meanwhile, California, New York, we can say, "Oh we're enlightened" but you know, certainly a much lower incidence of this admitted, I suppose, manifestation of racially-based voting.
Here is the same data on a map.
You kind of see the relationship between the redder states of where more people responded and said, "Yes, Barack Obama's race was a problem for me."
You see, comparing the map to '96, you see an overlap here.
This really seems to explain why Barack Obama did worse in this one part of the country.
So we have to ask why.
Is racism predictable in some way?
Is there something driving this?
Is it just about some weird stuff that goes on in Arkansas that we don't understand, and Kentucky?
Or are there more systematic factors at work?
And so we can look at a bunch of different variables.
These are things that economists and political scientists look at all the time -- things like income, and religion, education.
Which of these seem to drive this manifestation of racism in this big national experiment we had on November 4th?
And there are a couple of these that have strong predictive relationships, one of which is education, where you see the states with the fewest years of schooling per adult are in red, and you see this part of the country, the kind of Appalachians region, is less educated. It's just a fact.
And you see the relationship there with the racially-based voting patterns.
The other variable that's important is the type of neighborhood that you live in.
States that are more rural -- even to some extent of the states like New Hampshire and Maine -- they exhibit a little bit of this racially-based voting against Barack Obama.
So it's the combination of these two things: it's education and the type of neighbors that you have, which we'll talk about more in a moment.
And the thing about states like Arkansas and Tennessee is that they're both very rural, and they are educationally impoverished.
So yes, racism is predictable.
These things, among maybe other variables, but these things seem to predict it.
We're going to drill down a little bit more now, into something called the General Social Survey.
This is conducted by the University of Chicago every other year.
And they ask a series of really interesting questions.
In 2000 they had particularly interesting questions about racial attitudes.
One simple question they asked is, "Does anyone of the opposite race live in your neighborhood?"
We can see in different types of communities that the results are quite different.
In cites, about 80 percent of people have someone whom they consider a neighbor of another race, but in rural communities, only about 30 percent.
Probably because if you live on a farm, you might not have a lot of neighbors, period.
But nevertheless, you're not having a lot of interaction with people who are unlike you.
So what we're going to do now is take the white people in the survey and split them between those who have black neighbors -- or, really, some neighbor of another race -- and people who have only white neighbors.
And we see in some variables in terms of political attitudes, not a lot of difference.
This was eight years ago, some people were more Republican back then.
But you see Democrats versus Republican, not a big difference based on who your neighbors are.
And even some questions about race -- for example affirmative action, which is kind of a political question, a policy question about race, if you will -- not much difference here.
Affirmative action is not very popular frankly, with white voters, period.
But people with black neighbors and people with mono-racial neighborhoods feel no differently about it really.
But if you probe a bit deeper and get a bit more personal if you will, "Do you favor a law banning interracial marriage?"
There is a big difference.
People who don't have neighbors of a different race are about twice as likely to oppose interracial marriage as people who do.
Just based on who lives in your immediate neighborhood around you.
And likewise they asked, not in 2000, but in the same survey in 1996, "Would you not vote for a qualified black president?"
You see people without neighbors who are African-American who were much more likely to say, "That would give me a problem."
So it's really not even about urban versus rural.
It's about who you live with.
Racism is predictable. And it's predicted by interaction or lack thereof with people unlike you, people of other races.
So if you want to address it, the goal is to facilitate interaction with people of other races.
I have a couple of very obvious, I suppose, ideas for maybe how to do that.
I'm a big fan of cities.
Especially if we have cites that are diverse and sustainable, and can support people of different ethnicities and different income groups.
I think cities facilitate more of the kind of networking, the kind of casual interaction than you might have on a daily basis.
But also not everyone wants to live in a city, certainly not a city like New York.
So we can think more about things like street grids.
This is the neighborhood where I grew up in East Lansing, Michigan.
It's a traditional Midwestern community, which means you have real grid.
You have real neighborhoods and real trees, and real streets you can walk on.
And you interact a lot with your neighbors -- people you like, people you might not know.
And as a result it's a very tolerant community, which is different, I think, than something like this, which is in Schaumburg, Illinois, where every little set of houses has their own cul-de-sac and drive-through Starbucks and stuff like that.
I think that actually this type of urban design, which became more prevalent in the 1970s and 1980s -- I think there is a relationship between that and the country becoming more conservative under Ronald Reagan.
But also here is another idea we have -- is an intercollegiate exchange program where you have students going from New York abroad.
But frankly there are enough differences within the country now where maybe you can take a bunch of kids from NYU, have them go study for a semester at the University of Arkansas, and vice versa. Do it at the high school level.
Literally there are people who might be in school in Arkansas or Tennessee and might never interact in a positive affirmative way with someone from another part of the country, or of another racial group.
I think part of the education variable we talked about before is the networking experience you get when you go to college where you do get a mix of people that you might not interact with otherwise.
But the point is, this is all good news, because when something is predictable, it is what I call designable.
You can start thinking about solutions to solving that problem, even if the problem is pernicious and as intractable as racism.
If we understand the root causes of the behavior and where it manifests itself and where it doesn't, we can start to design solutions to it.
So that's all I have to say. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, in 2016, I was commissioned to produce a photo essay about the water crisis in Flint, Michigan.
And that's been going on since 2014.
And I accepted the commission with the idea that I would photograph three generations of women dealing with the crisis on a daily basis.
I was fortunate to meet two best friends, artists, activists and poets Amber Hasan and Shea Cobb, who took me around Flint.
As a school bus driver, Shea Cobb became the central figure of the photo essay, along with her mother, Ms. Rene, and her eight-year-old daughter, Zion.
I obsessively followed Shea's school bus routes.
And when Shea wasn't driving the bus, she would be watching over Zion, making sure she was studying.
I embedded myself in every intimate facet of Shea's life.
When Shea took me to Zion's school, and I saw the water fountains covered with signs that said, "Contaminated. Do not drink," I couldn't pick up my camera to photograph it.
It rocked me to the core to see that in America, we can go from fountains that say "Whites" or "Blacks only," to today seeing fountains that say, "Contaminated water. Do not drink."
And somehow, that's acceptable?
The residents in Flint have been forced to drink with, cook with and bathe with bottled water, while paying the highest water bills in the country for water that is infected with deadly legionella bacteria.
It was natural for me to go to Flint, because industrial pollution, bacteria-contaminated water were all too familiar for me growing up in my hometown, Braddock, Pennsylvania, where my mother and I battled cancer and autoimmune disorders like lupus.
Our 14-year collaboration, "The Notion of Family," was created out of our struggle to survive environmental racism, healthcare inequity and chemical emissions that were being deregulated and released from the United States Steel Corporation, making Braddock the town with the highest asthma and infant mortality rates in the country.
From the Monongahela River to the Flint River, in the words of W.E.B. Du Bois, "The town, the whole valley, has turned its back upon the river.
It has used it as a sewer, as a drain, as a place for throwing their waste."
General Motors has been cited for dumping chemicals in the Flint River for decades.
When my photo essay "Flint is Family" came out in August of 2016, it was released to remind America that although Flint was no longer headline news, the water crisis was far from over.
And, of course, I knew it was going to take more than a series of photographs on my part to bring relief to the people in Vehicle City.
Shea and I bonded over our mothers and grandmothers.
Amber and I bonded over our battles with lupus.
Together, we decided to remain in each other's life and continue our creative efforts.
In 2017, Shea and Amber cofounded artist collective The Sister Tour, whose mission is to provide a safe space for Flint artists.
One year later, I mounted my solo exhibition, "Flint is Family," here in New York City at Gavin Brown's Enterprise on West 127th Street.
As the audience approaches the facade of the building, they see a 30-foot billboard.
The 30-foot billboard is made of three large color negatives with the message "Water Is Life," spelled out in Nestle water bottles by The Sister Tour.
Nestle, the largest water-bottling company in the world, pumps 400 gallons of water per minute out of aquifers in Lake Michigan, nearly free of charge.
The company also extracts millions of liters of water from First Nation reservations, while they have no access to clean water at all.
This is a fundraiser print that I used to raise money to send The Sister Tour to different venues to educate people on the ongoing crisis.
I also continued to keep it in the public eye by producing countdown flags that were raised on institutions across the country.
This past June, Amber emailed me with the news that Michigan's attorney general dropped all criminal charges in the Flint Water Crisis investigation, where eight state and city employees were facing charges as serious as manslaughter.
I could no longer idly stand by and wait for the government to do its job.
Justice has been delayed, and justice has been denied.
It's been five years, and we're still waiting on justice for the men, women and children in Flint.
I asked Amber, "What can I do?"
She told me about a man named Moses West that she met in Puerto Rico, who invented a 26,000-pound atmospheric water generator.
Amber took Moses to elected officials in the city of Flint.
None of them seemed interested in bringing the machine for relief to Flint at all.
Amber needed to get the machine from a military base in Texas all the way to Flint.
Nobody in Flint had that kind of money lying around.
And it was at that point that I decided to take the proceeds from my solo exhibition "Flint is Family," along with the generous match grant from the Robert Rauschenberg Foundation, and sent it to Moses West.
This past July, Moses West and his atmospheric water generator arrived to Flint, Michigan, on North Saginaw between Marengo and Pulaski, and is actually still there right now, operating.
This community that sits three miles from downtown has been stripped of its schools, access to healthy grocery stores and clean water.
Socially, it's viewed as a violent, poor community.
But I see something completely different.
Moses, an officer, Ranger, veteran, was very clear about his water rescue mission: Bring relief of free, clean water to the people in Flint.
Teach them how to use the machine, teach them how to take care of it, and most importantly, take ownership of the machine.
Tell everybody across the city to bring all their containers and come and take as much water as they can stock up on, especially before the winter season hits; the machine doesn't extract moisture in freezing temperatures.
This technology pulls air through a high-volume air filter.
It mechanically creates condensation, which produces 2,000 gallons of water per day.
Residents are free to walk up to the machine anywhere between 9am and 8pm daily and take as much as they want, alleviating them from standing in long lines for bottled water.
I've been at the machine, interviewing people, asking them, "What does it mean to see Moses and his machine in [your] community?"
And, "What has it been like living without access to clean water?"
Alita told me, "It's a miracle that God gave Moses the knowledge and technology to provide us with pure drinking water."
She also told me that prior to the machine coming, she had severe headaches, and the water made her so sick to her stomach, she couldn't eat.
Tina told me that the lead-contaminated water made her hair fall out.
Usually, she's weak and very light-headed.
Since using the machine, she's had energy and strength.
David, he was overwhelmed with joy that someone from Texas cared.
When he tasted the water, he thought to himself, "Now, this is the way God intended water to be."
He brings three seven-gallon containers to refill to use at his barbecue stand.
Through creativity and solidarity, Amber Hasan, Shea Cobb, Tuklor Senegal, The Sister Tour, myself, the people of Flint, Dexter Moon, Moses West and his atmospheric water generator have been able to provide 120,000 gallons of free, clean water.
(Applause) The people in Flint deserve access to clean water.
Water is life.
It is the spirit that binds us from sickness, death and destruction.
Imagine how many millions of lives we could save if Moses's machine were in places like Newark, New Jersey, South Africa and India, with compassion instead of profit motives.
I loaded my camera, I locked my focus, and I placed my finger over the shutter release, as Shea and Zion went to take their first sip of clean water.
When the shutter released, I was overcome with a deep sense of joy and righteousness.
When I sent Shea some of the photographs, she wrote, "Thank you again for the light that you bring to my city."
I immediately replied, "The light was already there within you."
It's been four years since I've been photographing in Flint, and finally, I've been able to render a poetic justice.
No matter how dark a situation may be, a camera can extract the light and turn a negative into a positive.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Like many teachers, every year on the first day of school, I lead a sort of icebreaker activity with my students.
I teach at Lincoln High School in Lincoln, Nebraska, and we are one of the oldest and most diverse high schools in our state.
Also, to our knowledge, we're the only high school in the world whose mascot is the Links.
Like, a chain.
(Laughter) And with that being our mascot, we have a statue out front of our building of four links connected like a chain.
And each link means something.
Our links stand for tradition, excellence, unity and diversity.
So on the first day of school, I teach my new ninth-graders about the meaning behind those links, and I give them each a slip of paper.
On that paper, I ask them to write something about themselves.
It can be something that they love, something that they hope for -- anything that describes their identity.
And then I go around the room with a stapler, and I staple each of those slips together to make a chain.
And we hang that chain up in our classroom as a decoration, sure, but also as a reminder that we are all connected.
We are all links.
So what happens when one of those links feels weak?
And what happens when that weakness is in the person holding the stapler?
The person who's supposed to make those connections.
The teacher.
As teachers, we work every day to provide support socially, emotionally and academically to our students who come to us with diverse and tough circumstances.
Like most teachers, I have students who go home every day, and they sit around the kitchen table while one or both parents makes a healthy, well-rounded meal for them.
They spend suppertime summarizing the story they read in ninth-grade English that day, or explaining how Newton's laws of motion work.
But I also have students who go to the homeless shelter or to the group home.
They go to the car that their family is sleeping in right now.
They come to school with trauma, and when I go home every day, that goes home with me.
And see, that's the hard part about teaching.
It's not the grading, the lesson-planning, the meetings, though sure, those things do occupy a great deal of teachers' time and energy.
The tough part about teaching is all the things you can't control for your kids, all the things you can't change for them once they walk out your door.
And so I wonder if it's always been this way.
I think back to my undergraduate training at the University of Georgia, where we were taught in our methods classes that the concept of good teaching has changed.
We're not developing learners who are going to go out into a workforce where they'll stand on a line in a factory.
Rather, we're sending our kids out into a workforce where they need to be able to communicate, collaborate and problem-solve.
And that has caused teacher-student relationships to morph into something stronger than the giver of content and the receiver of knowledge.
Lectures and sitting in silent rows just doesn't cut it anymore.
We have to be able to build relationships with and among our students to help them feel connected in a world that depends on it.
I think back to my second year teaching.
I had a student who I'll call "David."
And I remember feeling like I'd done a pretty good job at teaching that year: "Hey, I ain't no first-year teacher.
I know what I'm doing."
And it was on the last day of school, I told David to have a great summer.
And I watched him walk down the hall, and I thought to myself, I don't even know what his voice sounds like.
And that's when I realized I wasn't doing it right.
So I changed almost everything about my teaching.
I built in plenty of opportunities for my students to talk to me and to talk to each other, to share their writing and to verbalize their learning.
And it was through those conversations I began not only to know their voice but to know their pain.
I had David in class again that next year, and I learned that his father was undocumented and had been deported.
He started acting out in school because all he wanted was for his family to be together again.
In so many ways, I felt his pain.
And I needed someone to listen, somebody to provide support for me so that I could support him in this thing that I could not even comprehend.
And we recognize that need for police officers who've witnessed a gruesome crime scene and nurses who have lost a patient.
But when it comes to teaching professionals, that urgency is lagging.
I believe it's paramount that students and teachers, administrators, paraprofessionals and all other support staff have convenient and affordable access to mental wellness supports.
When we are constantly serving others, often between 25 and 125 students each day, our emotional piggy banks are constantly being drawn upon.
After a while, it can become so depleted, that we just can't bear it anymore.
They call it "secondary trauma" and "compassion fatigue," the concept that we absorb the traumas our students share with us each day.
And after a while, our souls become weighed down by the heaviness of it all.
The Buffett Institute at the University of Nebraska recently found that most teachers -- 86 percent across early childhood settings -- experienced some depressive symptoms during the prior week.
They found that approximately one in 10 reported clinically significant depressive symptoms.
My interactions with colleagues and my own experiences make me feel like this is a universal struggle across all grade levels.
So what are we missing?
What are we allowing to break the chain and how do we repair it?
In my career, I've experienced the death by suicide of two students and one amazing teacher who loved his kids; countless students experiencing homelessness; and kids entering and exiting the justice system.
When these events happen, protocol is to say, "If you need someone to talk to, then ..."
And I say that's not enough.
I am so lucky.
I work in an amazing school with great leadership.
I serve a large district with so many healthy partnerships with community agencies.
They have provided steadily increasing numbers of school counselors and therapists and support staff to help our students.
They even provide staff members with access to free counseling as part of our employment plan.
But many small districts and even some large ones simply cannot foot the bill without aid.
(Exhales) Not only does every school need social and emotional support staff, trained professionals who can navigate the needs of the building -- not just the students, not just the teachers, but both -- we also need these trained professionals to intentionally seek out those closest to the trauma and check in with them.
Many schools are doing what they can to fill in the gaps, starting with acknowledging that the work that we do is downright hard.
Another school in Lincoln, Schoo Middle School, has what they call "Wellness Wednesdays."
They invite in community yoga teachers, they sponsor walks around the neighborhood during lunch and organize social events that are all meant to bring people together.
Zachary Elementary School in Zachary, Louisiana, has something they call a "Midweek Meetup," where they invite teachers to share lunch and to talk about the things that are going well and the things that are weighing heavy on their hearts.
These schools are making space for conversations that matter.
Finally, my friend and colleague Jen Highstreet takes five minutes out of each day to write an encouraging note to a colleague, letting them know that she sees their hard work and the heart that they share with others.
She knows that those five minutes can have an invaluable and powerful ripple effect across our school.
The chain that hangs in my classroom is more than just a decoration.
Those links hang over our heads for the entire four years that our students walk our halls.
And every year, I have seniors come back to my classroom, room 340, and they can still point out where their link hangs.
They remember what they wrote on it.
They feel connected and supported.
And they have hope.
Isn't that what we all need?
Somebody to reach out and make sure that we're OK.
To check in with us and remind us that we are a link.
Every now and then, we all just need a little help holding the stapler.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You know that little pink thing nestled in the corner of your eye?
Its actually the remnant of a third eyelid.
Known as the plica semilunaris, its much more prominent in birds and a few mammals, and functions like a windshield wiper to keep dust and debris out of their eyes.
But in humans, it doesnt work.
Its vestigial, meaning it no longer serves its original purpose.
There are several other vestigial structures like the plica semilunaris in the human body.
Most of these became vestigial long before homo sapiens existed, quietly riding along from one of our ancestor species to the next.
But why have they stuck around for so long?
To answer this question, it helps to understand natural selection.
Natural selection simply means that traits which help an organism survive and reproduce in a given environment are more likely to make it to the next generation.
As the environment changes, traits that were once useful can become harmful.
Those traits are often selected against, meaning they gradually disappear from the population.
But if a trait isnt actively harmful, it might not get selected against, and stick around even though it isnt useful.
Take the tailbone.
Evolutionary biologists think that as the climate got drier and grasslands popped up, our tail-bearing ancestors left the trees and started walking on land.
The tails that had helped them in the trees began to disrupt their ability to walk on land.
So individuals with mutations that reduced the length of their tails became more successful at life on land, surviving long enough to pass their short tails on to the next generation.
The change was likely gradual over millions of years until, about 20 million years ago, our ancestors external tails disappeared altogether.
Today, we know human embryos have tails that dissolve as the embryo develops.
But the stubby tailbone sticks around, probably because it doesnt cause any harm in fact, it serves a more minor function as the anchor point for certain other muscles.
Up to 85% of people have a vestigial muscle called the palmaris longus. To see if you do, put your hand down on a flat surface and touch your pinkie to your thumb.
If you see a little band pop up in the middle of your wrist, thats the tendon that attaches to this now-defunct muscle.
In this case, the fact that not everyone has it has helped us trace its function.
Vestigial traits can persist when theres no incentive to lose them but since theres also no incentive to keep them, random mutations will sometimes still eliminate them from part of the population.
Looking at our primate relatives, we can see that the palmaris longus is sometimes absent in those that spend more time on the land, but always present in those that spend more time in trees.
So we think it used to help us swing from branch to branch, and became unnecessary when we moved down to land.
The appendix, meanwhile, may once have been part of the intestinal system our ancestors used for digesting plant materials.
As their diets changed, those parts of the intestinal system began to shrink.
Unlike other vestigial structures, though, the appendix isnt always harmless it can become dangerously inflamed.
For most of human history, a burst appendix could be a death sentence.
So why did it stick around?
Its possible that it was very slowly on its way out, or that mutations simply hadnt arisen to make it smaller.
Or maybe it has other benefits for example, it might still be a reservoir of bacteria that helps us break down food.
But the fact is, were not really sure why the appendix persists.
Evolution is an imperfect process.
Human beings are the result of millions of years of trial, error, and random chance and were full of evolutionary relics to remind us of that.
Which of these three people is doing something risky?
Is it the one who takes their cholesterol medication with grapefruit juice?
The one who takes Acetaminophen pain relievers for a sore ankle before going out for drinks?
Or the one whos on a blood-thinning medication and takes an aspirin for a headache?
Actually, all of them are.
Each has inadvertently created a drug interaction that could, in extreme cases, lead to kidney failure; liver damage; or internal bleeding.
Drug interactions happen when the combination of a drug with another substance causes different effects than either would individually.
Foods, herbal supplements, legal drugs, and illicit substances can all cause drug interactions.
Most drug interactions fall into two categories.
Some take place when two substances effects influence each other directly.
In other cases, one substance effects how the body processes another, like how it is absorbed, metabolized, or transported around the body.
Blood thinners and aspirin, for example, have similar effects that become dangerous when combined.
Both prevent blood clots from forming blood thinners by preventing the formation of the clotting factors that hold clots together, and aspirin by preventing blood cells from clumping into groups that become clots.
Individually, these effects are usually safe, but taken together, they can prevent blood clotting to a dangerous extent, possibly causing internal bleeding.
While blood thinners and aspirin are generally harmless when taken individually, interactions where one substance exacerbates the effects of another can also take place between drugs that are independently harmful.
Cocaine and heroin are each dangerous, and those dangers compound when the two drugs are combined even though their behavioral effects may feel like they cancel each other out.
Cocaine is a stimulant, and many of its effects, like increased heart rate, cause the body to need more oxygen.
But heroin, a depressant, slows breathing reducing the bodys oxygen supply just when it needs more.
This combination strains the organs and can cause respiratory failure and death.
The interaction between grapefruit juice and certain medications in class of cholesterol-lowering drugs called statins, has to do with drug metabolism.
The liver produces enzymes, molecules that facilitate the breakdown of substances that enter the body.
Enzymes can both activate drugs, by breaking them down into their therapeutic ingredients from more complex molecules, and deactivate them, by breaking harmful compounds down into harmless metabolites.
There are many, many different enzymes, each of which has a binding site that fits a specific molecule.
Grapefruit binds to the same enzyme as statins, making less of that enzyme available to break down statins.
So combining the two means that a greater concentration of the drug stays in the bloodstream for a longer period of time, potentially causing kidney failure.
Alcohol can also alter the function of the enzyme that breaks down Acetaminophen, the active ingredient in pain relievers like Tylenol and paracetamol.
When someone takes Acetaminophen, some of it is converted into a toxic substance.
At the recommended dose, there isnt usually enough of this toxic byproduct to cause harm.
But heavy drinking can alter enzyme activity so more of that byproduct is produced, potentially causing liver damage even with whats usually a safe dose of acetominophen.
Meanwhile, the herbal remedy Saint Johns Wort increases the livers production of a particular enzyme.
That means the drugs this enzyme is responsible for breaking down get metabolized faster sometimes too fast, before they can have their therapeutic effects.
In spite of the dizzying number of possible interactions, most of the dangerous interactions with commonly used drugs are well known.
And new developments in science are helping us keep better track of drug interactions than ever.
Some researchers are developing AI programs that can predict the side effects of drug interactions before they occur, using information about the landscape of protein interactions within your body.
For the new drugs that are being developed all the time, supercomputers are being used to find potential interactions while those drugs are still in development.
In February 2013, my wife and I moved to Singapore.
Exactly at the same time, Uber has announced it started operations in the country.
Now, my wife and I agree on a lot of things, but using Uber was definitely not one of them.
While I was excited about the technology and how maybe we don't need to own cars anymore, she felt that every Uber car is here to steal jobs from taxi drivers.
And Sarah was not the only one.
As the Ubers, Airbnbs and Amazons of the world -- what we call "online marketplaces" -- as they started expanding their presence, we have heard, all of us, countless policymakers worried about how to deal with these new risks of job destruction, lower wages and tax leakage.
We've also heard company leaders worried about aggressive competition from global platforms eating up their local businesses.
And on the rational level, of course I understand.
After all, this is basic supply and demand economics.
If, in any market, you dramatically increase supply, you should expect prices, profitability and growth to go down for existing players.
But in my personal experience, I've also seen the other side of the story.
Where online marketplaces, like Gojek in Indonesia or Jumia in Africa, have helped their business ecosystems and the communities around them.
The positive side I have seen demonstrated itself in a woman, a taxi driver in Egypt, that now had the opportunity to work without the harassment she faced in the taxi business.
It demonstrated itself through a village in Kenya that got an economic boost, because the nearby beautiful but completely unknown lake is now becoming a national ecotourism spot.
Online marketplaces will continue to grow.
And they will transform the way we shop, the way we travel and the way we transact with each other.
So we really need to understand where is the truth between those two stories.
Should we expect more of the bright side or more of the dark and worrying side?
And is there a way to get the first without getting the second?
I believe there is.
As a strategy consultant, I study businesses for a living.
And as a mathematician at heart, I couldn't live with something and its opposite being equally true.
So, I went back to fundamentals, and I asked the question: What do online marketplaces really do?
What do they do?
Well, at their core, they're doing something very simple.
They match sellers and buyers.
That's it.
For drivers and passengers, you get Uber, Grab in Southeast Asia or DiDi in China.
For matching merchants and consumers, you get Amazon, Alibaba or Jumia in Africa.
And for housing, you get Airbnb; for fundraising, you get Kickstarter -- the list goes on.
What all these examples have in common is that they transition this basic functionality of matching sellers and buyers from the physical world to the digital world.
And by doing so, they can find better matches, do it faster and ultimately, unlock more value for everyone.
In fact, online marketplaces' core benefit is that they get us more from the same amount of effort.
For example, if you're a taxi driver in San Francisco and you decide to work 10 hours per day, then you're actually having a paying passenger in your car for four hours out of the 10.
If you take the same car and put it on a platform like Uber, you can have paying passengers for an additional one and a half hours.
This is the same car becoming 40 percent more productive.
And the same has been proven true for other online marketplaces.
By design, they create more value for the economy.
Now, we need to figure out who gets this additional value.
You can give it to the drivers -- more passengers, more income.
You can give it to consumers, if you reduce prices.
Or you can decide that the platform gets to keep all of it.
What usually happens is that all three of them would somehow split it.
But what about the rest of us?
We can also be impacted without being on either sides of this business.
If my neighbor decides to rent his apartment on Airbnb, and we have more people coming in and out of the building, more noise than usual, then I'm getting an unpleasant side effect of this productivity magic.
This is what economists would call a "negative externality."
The negative externality of Uber cars becoming more productive is taxi drivers seeing the value of their licenses drop by as much as 30 percent in New York, for example.
This is the dark side.
And this is what sparks street demonstrations and sometimes, sometimes, even violence.
I profoundly believe this is avoidable.
And it became clearer to me the more I have spent time in emerging markets.
In fact, during my time in Singapore, I spent half of any given week traveling in the region, between Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, and I became a user -- actually, more of a fan -- of online marketplaces that were not that well-known back then.
But some of them made interesting strategic trade-offs that dramatically reduced their side effects, their externalities.
Take Gojek, for example.
They're basically Uber for motor bikes.
They are one of the most liked online marketplaces in Indonesia, and this has a lot to do with the role they chose to play.
Instead of picking a fight with every other transportation option out there, they choose to gradually integrate them within their own platform, so that without leaving the Gojek app, you can check the public transportation schedule and choose to take a bus for a long distance.
Then, maybe, a motorbike or a traditional taxi that you can order and pay for from within the same app.
If you look at Gojek today, nine out of 10 previous motor taxi drivers believe their quality of life has improved after joining the platform.
And nine out of 10 consumers -- nine out of 10 -- believe that Gojek has a positive impact on society in general.
Now, this level of trust is what allowed Gojek to grow into what is today a super online marketplace for everything from food to grocery even massages and laundry pickups.
It all came from a deliberate trade-off to be an orchestrator of a bigger ecosystem where others also have their role to play, instead of a single winner, a hero, that takes for himself what would, at the end, be a smaller pie.
Another interesting example is Jumia.
Jumia is the equivalent of Amazon in Africa.
But they don't generate the same level of fear in the small-business community.
And one of the reasons for that is because they have decided to actively invest in African entrepreneurs, to grow them into the digital age.
Now keep in mind, Jumia is operating in countries with some of the lowest digital literacy and digital connectivity scores in the world.
Now they could have dealt with that the usual way, through lobbying for reforms -- and they probably do that -- but they have also built Jumia University, an e-learning platform where merchants can come and learn basic digital and business skills.
We have studied online marketplaces in Africa last year.
And during that study, we have met one of Jumia's merchants.
His name is Jomo.
He was fired from his job in 2014, and at that time, he decided he wanted to become his own boss.
He wanted to be independent.
He also wanted to never be fired again.
So at that time, Jomo had no clue what a business is.
So he needed to go through a series of trainings to learn how to select products, how to price them and how to promote them online.
Today, Jomo has a 10-employee online business.
And as of a few months ago, he just opened his very first brick-and-mortar shop in the suburbs of Nairobi.
Now, through its university, Jumia has the potential of helping a huge number of Jomos.
And we have estimated that together with other online marketplaces on the continent, they can generate three million additional jobs by 2025.
And they would do that either directly, or through their impact on the wider community.
And sometimes, taking that wider impact into consideration or forgetting about it can make or break a platform.
To illustrate that, let's go back to Singapore.
So, when we decided with my wife to leave the country last year, Uber decided to do the same.
At the same time, again, we started to see that pattern, but maybe it's a coincidence.
In reality, Uber lost the ride-hailing battle to a Malaysian-born start-up called Grab.
Now, interestingly, my wife didn't have the same level of concerns with Grab, because when Grab started, it had a different name.
It was called MyTeksi, and as the name suggests, it started as a platform for taxis.
So when Grab started expanding the driver pool beyond taxis, it was seen as gradual and reasonable.
They were also very careful while doing so.
They thought of what kind of social safety net they should bring to all drivers.
So they put in place special insurance packages and even financial education programs.
Now, compare that with what happened in London, in New York, in Paris, where taxi drivers didn't feel that the platforms understood they had to pay 200,000 euros for their license -- and mostly in loans.
When you don't take that kind of social environmental information into account, you get strong reactions.
I'm not trying to argue that the trade-offs by either Grab or Jumia or Gojek are risk-free.
Did they slow down growth at some point, temporarily?
Maybe.
But look at them today.
Gojek is worth 10 billion dollars.
Jumia is one of only three unicorns in the whole of Africa.
And Grab, well, they pushed out Uber out of the whole region of Southeast Asia.
And I also think these trade-offs have nothing specific to emerging markets.
Amazon or Uber or others can learn from them and adapt them to their own realities.
In the long run, this doesn't need to be a zero-sum game.
In the long run -- and this is maybe the Asian side of me speaking -- it pays to be patient.
It pays to reconsider your goal and your priorities in the light of a much bigger equation that includes you and your users, of course, but also it includes regulators, policymakers, your communities.
And I would argue, above all, it includes the very businesses you are meant to disrupt.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I'm here to tell you a story of success from Africa.
A year and a half ago, four of the five people who are full time members at Ushahidi, which means "testimony" in Swahili, were TED Fellows.
A year ago in Kenya we had post-election violence.
And in that time we prototyped and built, in about three days, a system that would allow anybody with a mobile phone to send in information and reports on what was happening around them.
We took what we knew about Africa, the default device, the mobile phone, as our common denominator, and went from there.
We got reports like this.
This is just a couple of them from January 17th, last year.
And our system was rudimentary. It was very basic.
It was a mash-up that used data that we collected from people, and we put it on our map.
But then we decided we needed to do something more.
We needed to take what we had built and create a platform out of it so that it could be used elsewhere in the world.
And so there is a team of developers from all over Africa, who are part of this team now -- from Ghana, from Malawi, from Kenya.
There is even some from the U.S.
We're building for smartphones, so that it can be used in the developed world, as well as the developing world.
We are realizing that this is true.
If it works in Africa then it will work anywhere.
And so we build for it in Africa first and then we move to the edges.
It's now been deployed in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
It's being used by NGOs all over East Africa, small NGOs doing their own little projects.
Just this last month it was deployed by Al Jazeera in Gaza.
But that's actually not what I'm here to talk about.
I'm here to talk about the next big thing, because what we're finding out is that we have this capacity to report eyewitness accounts of what's going on in real time.
We're seeing this in events like Mumbai recently, where it's so much easier to report now than it is to consume it.
There is so much information; what do you do?
This is the Twitter reports for over three days just covering Mumbai.
How do you decide what is important?
What is the veracity level of what you're looking at?
So what we find is that there is this great deal of wasted crisis information because there is just too much information for us to actually do anything with right now.
And what we're actually really concerned with is this first three hours.
What we are looking at is the first three hours.
How do we deal with that information that is coming in?
You can't understand what is actually happening.
On the ground and around the world people are still curious, and trying to figure out what is going on. But they don't know.
So what we built of course, Ushahidi, is crowdsourcing this information.
You see this with Twitter, too. You get this information overload.
So you've got a lot of information. That's great.
But now what?
So we think that there is something interesting we can do here.
And we have a small team who is working on this.
We think that we can actually create a crowdsourced filter.
Take the crowd and apply them to the information.
And by rating it and by rating the different people who submit information, we can get refined results and weighted results.
So that we have a better understanding of the probability of something being true or not.
This is the kind of innovation that is, quite frankly -- it's interesting that it's coming from Africa.
It's coming from places that you wouldn't expect.
From young, smart developers.
And it's a community around it that has decided to build this.
So, thank you very much.
And we are very happy to be part of the TED family.
(Applause)
Many of us here use technology in our day-to-day.
And some of us rely on technology to do our jobs.
For a while, I thought of machines and the technologies that drive them as perfect tools that could make my work more efficient and more productive.
But with the rise of automation across so many different industries, it led me to wonder: If machines are starting to be able to do the work traditionally done by humans, what will become of the human hand?
How does our desire for perfection, precision and automation affect our ability to be creative?
In my work as an artist and researcher, I explore AI and robotics to develop new processes for human creativity.
For the past few years, I've made work alongside machines, data and emerging technologies.
It's part of a lifelong fascination about the dynamics of individuals and systems and all the messiness that that entails.
It's how I'm exploring questions about where AI ends and we begin and where I'm developing processes that investigate potential sensory mixes of the future.
I think it's where philosophy and technology intersect.
Doing this work has taught me a few things.
It's taught me how embracing imperfection can actually teach us something about ourselves.
It's taught me that exploring art can actually help shape the technology that shapes us.
And it's taught me that combining AI and robotics with traditional forms of creativity -- visual arts in my case -- can help us think a little bit more deeply about what is human and what is the machine.
And it's led me to the realization that collaboration is the key to creating the space for both as we move forward.
It all started with a simple experiment with machines, called "Drawing Operations Unit: Generation 1."
I call the machine "D.O.U.G." for short.
Before I built D.O.U.G, I didn't know anything about building robots.
I took some open-source robotic arm designs, I hacked together a system where the robot would match my gestures and follow [them] in real time.
The premise was simple: I would lead, and it would follow.
I would draw a line, and it would mimic my line.
So back in 2015, there we were, drawing for the first time, in front of a small audience in New York City.
The process was pretty sparse -- no lights, no sounds, nothing to hide behind.
Just my palms sweating and the robot's new servos heating up.
(Laughs) Clearly, we were not built for this.
But something interesting happened, something I didn't anticipate.
See, D.O.U.G., in its primitive form, wasn't tracking my line perfectly.
While in the simulation that happened onscreen it was pixel-perfect, in physical reality, it was a different story.
It would slip and slide and punctuate and falter, and I would be forced to respond.
There was nothing pristine about it.
And yet, somehow, the mistakes made the work more interesting.
The machine was interpreting my line but not perfectly.
And I was forced to respond.
We were adapting to each other in real time.
And seeing this taught me a few things.
It showed me that our mistakes actually made the work more interesting.
And I realized that, you know, through the imperfection of the machine, our imperfections became what was beautiful about the interaction.
And I was excited, because it led me to the realization that maybe part of the beauty of human and machine systems is their shared inherent fallibility.
For the second generation of D.O.U.G., I knew I wanted to explore this idea.
But instead of an accident produced by pushing a robotic arm to its limits, I wanted to design a system that would respond to my drawings in ways that I didn't expect.
So, I used a visual algorithm to extract visual information from decades of my digital and analog drawings.
I trained a neural net on these drawings in order to generate recurring patterns in the work that were then fed through custom software back into the machine.
I painstakingly collected as many of my drawings as I could find -- finished works, unfinished experiments and random sketches -- and tagged them for the AI system.
And since I'm an artist, I've been making work for over 20 years.
Collecting that many drawings took months, it was a whole thing.
And here's the thing about training AI systems: it's actually a lot of hard work.
A lot of work goes on behind the scenes.
But in doing the work, I realized a little bit more about how the architecture of an AI is constructed.
And I realized it's not just made of models and classifiers for the neural network.
But it's a fundamentally malleable and shapable system, one in which the human hand is always present.
It's far from the omnipotent AI we've been told to believe in.
So I collected these drawings for the neural net.
And we realized something that wasn't previously possible.
My robot D.O.U.G. became a real-time interactive reflection of the work I'd done through the course of my life.
The data was personal, but the results were powerful.
And I got really excited, because I started thinking maybe machines don't need to be just tools, but they can function as nonhuman collaborators.
And even more than that, I thought maybe the future of human creativity isn't in what it makes but how it comes together to explore new ways of making.
So if D.O.U.G._1 was the muscle, and D.O.U.G._2 was the brain, then I like to think of D.O.U.G._3 as the family.
I knew I wanted to explore this idea of human-nonhuman collaboration at scale.
So over the past few months, I worked with my team to develop 20 custom robots that could work with me as a collective.
They would work as a group, and together, we would collaborate with all of New York City.
I was really inspired by Stanford researcher Fei-Fei Li, who said, "if we want to teach machines how to think, we need to first teach them how to see."
It made me think of the past decade of my life in New York, and how I'd been all watched over by these surveillance cameras around the city.
And I thought it would be really interesting if I could use them to teach my robots to see.
So with this project, I thought about the gaze of the machine, and I began to think about vision as multidimensional, as views from somewhere.
We collected video from publicly available camera feeds on the internet of people walking on the sidewalks, cars and taxis on the road, all kinds of urban movement.
We trained a vision algorithm on those feeds based on a technique called "optical flow," to analyze the collective density, direction, dwell and velocity states of urban movement.
Our system extracted those states from the feeds as positional data and became pads for my robotic units to draw on.
Instead of a collaboration of one-to-one, we made a collaboration of many-to-many.
By combining the vision of human and machine in the city, we reimagined what a landscape painting could be.
Throughout all of my experiments with D.O.U.G., no two performances have ever been the same.
And through collaboration, we create something that neither of us could have done alone: we explore the boundaries of our creativity, human and nonhuman working in parallel.
I think this is just the beginning.
This year, I've launched Scilicet, my new lab exploring human and interhuman collaboration.
We're really interested in the feedback loop between individual, artificial and ecological systems.
We're connecting human and machine output to biometrics and other kinds of environmental data.
We're inviting anyone who's interested in the future of work, systems and interhuman collaboration to explore with us.
We know it's not just technologists that have to do this work and that we all have a role to play.
We believe that by teaching machines how to do the work traditionally done by humans, we can explore and evolve our criteria of what's made possible by the human hand.
And part of that journey is embracing the imperfections and recognizing the fallibility of both human and machine, in order to expand the potential of both.
Today, I'm still in pursuit of finding the beauty in human and nonhuman creativity.
In the future, I have no idea what that will look like, but I'm pretty curious to find out.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to read a few strips.
These are, most of these are from a monthly page I do in and architecture and design magazine called Metropolis.
And the first story is called "The Faulty Switch."
Another beautifully designed new building ruined by the sound of a common wall light switch.
It's fine during the day when the main rooms are flooded with sunlight.
But at dusk everything changes.
The architect spent hundreds of hours designing the burnished brass switchplates for his new office tower.
And then left it to a contractor to install these 79-cent switches behind them.
We know instinctively where to reach when we enter a dark room.
We automatically throw the little nub of plastic upward.
But the sound we are greeted with, as the room is bathed in the simulated glow of late-afternoon light, recalls to mind a dirty men's room in the rear of a Greek coffee shop.
(Laughter) This sound colors our first impression of any room; it can't be helped.
But where does this sound, commonly described as a click, come from?
Is it simply the byproduct of a crude mechanical action?
Or is it an imitation of one half the set of sounds we make to express disappointment?
The often dental consonant of no Indo-European language.
Or is it the amplified sound of a synapse firing in the brain of a cockroach?
In the 1950s they tried their best to muffle this sound with mercury switches and silent knob controls.
But today these improvements seem somehow inauthentic.
The click is the modern triumphal clarion proceeding us through life, announcing our entry into every lightless room.
The sound made flicking a wall switch off is of a completely different nature.
It has a deep melancholy ring.
Children don't like it.
It's why they leave lights on around the house. (Laughter) Adults find it comforting.
But wouldn't it be an easy matter to wire a wall switch so that it triggers the muted horn of a steam ship?
Or the recorded crowing of a rooster?
Or the distant peel of thunder?
Thomas Edison went through thousands of unlikely substances before he came upon the right one for the filament of his electric light bulb.
Why have we settled so quickly for the sound of its switch?
That's the end of that.
(Applause) The next story is called "In Praise of the Taxpayer."
That so many of the city's most venerable taxpayers have survived yet another commercial building boom, is cause for celebration.
These one or two story structures, designed to yield only enough income to cover the taxes on the land on which they stand, were not meant to be permanent buildings.
Yet for one reason or another they have confounded the efforts of developers to be combined into lots suitable for high-rise construction.
Although they make no claim to architectural beauty, they are, in their perfect temporariness, a delightful alternative to the large-scale structures that might someday take their place.
The most perfect examples occupy corner lots.
They offer a pleasant respite from the high-density development around them.
A break of light and air, an architectural biding of time.
So buried in signage are these structures, that it often takes a moment to distinguish the modern specially constructed taxpayer from its neighbor: the small commercial building from an earlier century, whose upper floors have been sealed, and whose groundfloor space now functions as a taxpayer.
The few surfaces not covered by signs are often clad in a distinctive, dark green-gray, striated aluminum siding.
Take-out sandwich shops, film processing drop-offs, peep-shows and necktie stores.
Now these provisional structures have, in some cases, remained standing for the better part of a human lifetime.
The temporary building is a triumph of modern industrial organization, a healthy sublimation of the urge to build, and proof that not every architectural idea need be set in stone.
That's the end.
(Laughter) And the next story is called, "On the Human Lap."
For the ancient Egyptians the lap was a platform upon which to place the earthly possessions of the dead -- 30 cubits from foot to knee.
It was not until the 14th century that an Italian painter recognized the lap as a Grecian temple, upholstered in flesh and cloth.
Over the next 200 years we see the infant Christ go from a sitting to a standing position on the Virgin's lap, and then back again.
Every child recapitulates this ascension, straddling one or both legs, sitting sideways, or leaning against the body.
From there, to the modern ventriloquist's dummy, is but a brief moment in history.
You were late for school again this morning.
The ventriloquist must first make us believe that a small boy is sitting on his lap.
The illusion of speech follows incidentally.
What have you got to say for yourself, Jimmy?
As adults we admire the lap from a nostalgic distance.
We have fading memories of that provisional temple, erected each time an adult sat down.
On a crowded bus there was always a lap to sit on.
It is children and teenage girls who are most keenly aware of its architectural beauty.
They understand the structural integrity of a deep avuncular lap, as compared to the shaky arrangement of a neurotic niece in high heels.
The relationship between the lap and its owner is direct and intimate.
I envision a 36-story, 450-unit residential high-rise -- a reason to consider the mental health of any architect before granting an important commission.
The bathrooms and kitchens will, of course, have no windows.
The lap of luxury is an architectural construct of childhood, which we seek, in vain, as adults, to employ.
That's the end.
(Laughter) The next story is called "The Haverpiece Collection" A nondescript warehouse, visible for a moment from the northbound lanes of the Prykushko Expressway, serves as the temporary resting place for the Haverpiece collection of European dried fruit.
The profound convolutions on the surface of a dried cherry.
The foreboding sheen of an extra-large date.
Do you remember wandering as a child through those dark wooden storefront galleries?
Where everything was displayed in poorly labeled roach-proof bins.
Pears dried in the form of genital organs.
Apricot halves like the ears of cherubim.
In 1962 the unsold stock was purchased by Maurice Haverpiece, a wealthy prune juice bottler, and consolidated to form the core collection.
As an art form it lies somewhere between still-life painting and plumbing.
Upon his death in 1967, a quarter of the items were sold off for compote to a high-class hotel restaurant.
(Laughter) Unsuspecting guests were served stewed turn-of-the-century Turkish figs for breakfast.
(Laughter) The rest of the collection remains here, stored in plain brown paper bags until funds can be raised to build a permanent museum and study center.
A shoe made of apricot leather for the daughter of a czar.
That's the end. Thank you.
(Applause)
Asgard, a realm of wonders, was where the Norse Gods made their home.
There Odins great hall of Valhalla towered above the mountains and Bifrost, the rainbow bridge, anchored itself.
But though their domain was magnificent, it stood undefended from the giants and trolls of Jotunheim, who despised the gods and sought to destroy them.
One day when Thor, strongest of the gods, was off fighting these foes, a stranger appeared, riding a powerful gray horse.
The visitor made the gods an astonishing offer.
He would build them the greatest wall theyd ever seen, higher than any giant could climb and stronger than any troll could break.
All he asked in return was the beautiful goddess Freyas hand in marriage along with the sun and moon from the sky.
The gods balked at this request and were ready to send him away.
But the trickster Loki concocted a devious plan.
He told the gods they should accept the strangers offer, but set such strict conditions that he would fail to complete the wall in time.
That way, they would lose nothing, while getting most of the wall built for free.
Freya didnt like this idea at all, but Odin and the other gods were convinced and came to an agreement with the builder.
He would only have one winter to complete the wall.
If any part was unfinished by the first day of summer, he would receive no payment.
And he could have no help from any other people.
The gods sealed the deal with solemn oaths and swore the mason would come to no harm in Asgard.
In the morning, the stranger began to dig the foundations at an astonishing speed, and at nightfall he set off towards the mountains to obtain the building stones.
But it was only the next morning, when they saw him returning, that the gods began to worry.
As agreed, no other people were helping the mason.
But his horse Svadilfari was hauling a load of stones so massive it left trenches in the ground behind them.
Winter came and went.
The stranger kept building, Svadilfari kept hauling, and neither snow nor rain could slow their progress.
With only three days left until summer, the wall stood high and impenetrable, with only the gate left to be built.
Horrified, the gods realized that not only would they lose their fertility goddess forever, but without the sun and moon the world would be plunged into eternal darkness.
They wondered why theyd made such a foolish wager and then remembered Loki and his terrible advice.
Suddenly, Loki didnt feel so clever.
All of his fellow gods threatened him with an unimaginably painful death if he didnt find some way to prevent the builder from getting his payment.
So Loki promised to take care of the situation, and dashed away.
Outside, night had fallen, and the builder prepared to set off to retrieve the final load of stones.
But just as he called Svadilfari to him, a mare appeared in the field.
She was so beautiful that Svadilfari ignored his master and broke free of his reins.
The mason tried to catch him, but the mare ran deep into the woods and Svadilfari followed.
The stranger was furious.
He knew that the gods were behind this and confronted them: no longer as a mild-mannered mason, but in his true form as a terrifying mountain giant.
This was a big mistake.
Thor had just returned to Asgard, and now that the gods knew a giant was in their midst, they disregarded their oaths.
The only payment the builder would receive and the last thing he would ever see was the swing of Thors mighty hammer Mjolnir.
As they set the final stones into the wall, the gods celebrated their victory.
Loki was not among them, however.
Several months would pass before he finally returned, followed by a beautiful gray foal with eight legs.
The foal would grow into a magnificent steed named Sleipnir and become Odins mount, a horse that could outrun the wind itself.
But exactly where he had come from was something Loki preferred not to discuss.
So I've experienced a lot of success in my life.
Over a decade ago, I started a business straight out of uni with my mate, Scott.
Now, having no prior business experience and not really any grand plan -- in fact, our goals when we started were not to have to get a real job (Laughter) and to not have to wear a suit to work every day.
Check and check.
(Laughter) Today, we have thousands of amazing employees, and millions of people use our software around the planet.
And technically, even outside the planet, if you count those that are currently on their way to Mars.
So you'd think that I know what I'm doing every day when I go to work.
Well, let me let you in on something: most days, I still feel like I often don't know what I'm doing.
I've felt that way for 15 years, and I've since learned that feeling is called "impostor syndrome."
Have you ever felt out of your depth, like a fraud, and just kind of guessed/bullshitted your way through the situation -- (Laughter) petrified that anytime, someone was going to call you on it?
Well, I can think of many examples where I felt like this.
Interviewing our first HR manager, having never worked in a company that had an HR department -- (Laughter) terrified as I walked into the interview, thinking, "What am I going to ask this person?"
Or attending board meetings in a T-shirt surrounded by suits, and acronyms are flying around, feeling like a five-year-old as I surreptitiously write them down in my notebook, so I can look them up on Wikipedia when I get home later.
(Laughter) Or, in the early days, when people would call up and ask for accounts payable, I would freeze and think, "Wait, are they asking for money or giving it to us?"
(Laughter) And I would cover the phone, cover the mouthpiece of the phone, and say, "Scott, you're in accounts," and pass it across.
(Laughter) We both did a lot of jobs back then.
So for me, impostor syndrome is a feeling of being well, well out of your depth, yet already entrenched in the situation.
Internally, you know you're not skilled enough, experienced enough or qualified enough to justify being there, yet you are there, and you have to figure a way out, because you can't just get out.
It's not a fear of failure, and it's not a fear of being unable to do it.
It's more a sensation of getting away with something, a fear of being discovered, that at any time, someone is going to figure this out.
And if they did figure it out, you'd honestly think, "Well, that's fair enough, actually."
(Laughter) One of my favorite writers, Neil Gaiman, put it so beautifully in a commencement address he gave at a university, called "Make Good Art."
I want to make sure I get his quote correct.
"I was convinced that there would be a knock on the door, and a man with a clipboard would be there to tell me that it was all over, that they'd caught up with me, and that I would now have to go and get a real job."
Now, when there's a knock on my door, I still feel like some sort of dark-suited clipboard man is going to be there to tell me that my time is kind of up.
And being a crap cook, I'm quite relieved when it's just someone with a pizza for the kids.
(Laughter) But it's important to note that it's not all bad.
There's a lot of goodness, I think, in those feelings.
And this isn't some sort of motivational-poster type talk, a "Begin it now."
It's more of an introspection into my own experiences of impostor syndrome, and how I've tried to learn to harness them and turn them into some sort of a force for good.
And a great example of those experiences is in the early days of Atlassian's history.
We were about four years old, and we had about 70 employees.
And at the advice of our auditors -- most good stories start with advice from an auditor -- (Laughter) we entered the New South Wales Entrepreneur of the Year competition.
Now, we were surprised when we won the New South Wales Entrepreneur of the Year in the young category for entrepreneurs under 40.
There were eight categories.
And so surprised, in fact, having looked at the list of people we were up against, I didn't even turn up to the awards ceremony.
So Scott collected the gong by himself.
And then we traveled off to the national awards.
I thought I should probably turn up to those.
So we rented some suits, I invited a girl that I had just met -- we'll get to her in a second -- (Laughter) and off we went to the big black-tie gala.
Now, our surprise turned to shock in the first award of the night, the young category, when we beat all of the other states and won the Australian Young Entrepreneur of the Year.
When the shock had worn off, we got a lot of champagne to the table and the party began, and the night was surely over.
We were having a royally great time.
Fast-forward to the last award of the night, and our shock turned into everybody's shock when we won the Australian Entrepreneur of the Year against all of the other categories.
Now, so shocked was everybody else, in fact, that the announcer, the CEO of Ernst and Young, opened the envelope, and the first words out of his mouth were, "Oh my God."
(Laughter) And then he reset himself and announced that we had won.
(Laughter) So we knew we were in way too deep.
And from there, the water got a lot deeper, because we jetted off to Monte Carlo to represent Australia in the World Entrepreneur of the Year against 40 other different countries.
Now, in another rented suit, I was at one of the dinners and sitting next to a lovely man called Belmiro de Azevedo, who was the winner from Portugal.
Total champion.
At 65, he had been running his business for 40 years.
He had 30,000 employees.
Don't forget, at the time, we had 70.
And he had four billion euro in turnover.
And after a couple of wines, I remember admitting to him that I felt that we did not deserve to be there, that we were well out of our depth, and at some time, someone was going to figure this out and send us home to Australia.
And he, I remember, just paused and looked at me and said that he felt exactly the same way and that he suspected all the winners were feeling that way, and that despite not knowing Scott or I or really anything about technology, he said that we were obviously doing something right and should probably just keep going.
(Laughter) Now, this was a pretty big light bulb moment for me for two reasons.
One, I realized that other people felt this as well.
And two, I realized it doesn't go away with any form of success.
I had assumed that successful people didn't feel like frauds, and I now know that the opposite is more likely to be true.
And this isn't just a feeling that I have at work.
It happens in my personal life, too.
In the early days, I was flying back and forth to San Francisco every week for Atlassian, and I racked up a lot of frequent flyer points and got access to the Qantas business lounge.
Now, if there's ever a place that I don't belong ...
(Laughter) It doesn't help when I walk in and they generally look at me in shorts and jeans, or jeans and a T-shirt, and say, "Can I help you, son? Are you lost?"
But anyway, sometimes life happens in the Qantas lounge when you'd least expect it.
One morning, over a decade ago, I was sitting there on my regularly weekly commute, and a beautiful woman from way out of my league walked into the Qantas lounge and continued walking straight up to me in a case of mistaken identity.
She thought I was someone else, so in this case, I actually was an impostor.
(Laughter) But rather than freeze as I would have historically done or chivalrously maybe informed her of her error, I just tried to keep the conversation going.
(Laughter) And classic Australian bullshit became some sort of forward movement and a phone number.
And I took that girl to the awards ceremony a couple of months later.
And more than a decade later, I'm incredibly happy that she is now my wife, and we have four amazing children together.
(Applause) But you'd think that when I wake up every morning, I wouldn't roll over and look at her and think, "She's going to say, 'Who are you, and who gave you that side of the bed?' (Laughter) 'Get out of here.'" But she doesn't.
And I think she sometimes feels the same way.
And apparently, that's one of the reasons that we'll likely have a successful marriage.
You see, in researching this talk, I learned that one of the attributes of the most successful relationships is when both partners feel out of their league.
They feel that their partner is out of their league.
They feel like impostors.
And if they don't freeze, and they're thankful, and they work harder and they stretch to be the best partner they can, it's likely to be a very successful relationship.
So if you have this feeling, don't freeze.
Try to keep the conversation going, even if she thinks that you're somebody that you're not.
Now, feeling like, or people thinking I'm someone I'm not actually happens quite frequently.
A great example from my more recent past, a few months ago, I was up late at night with one of my kids, and I saw something on Twitter about Tesla saying that they could solve South Australia's rolling series of power crises with one of their large industrial batteries.
Without thinking, I fired off a bunch of tweets, challenging them and saying were they really serious about this.
And in doing so, I managed to kick a very small rock off a very big hill that turned into an avalanche that I found myself tumbling in the middle of.
Because you see, a few hours later, Elon tweeted me back and said that they were deadly serious, that within a hundred days of contract signing, they could install a 100-megawatt-hour facility, which is a giant battery of a world-class size, one of the biggest ever made on the planet.
And that's when all hell really broke loose.
Within 24 hours, I had every major media outlet texting and emailing and trying to get in contact with me to get opinion as some sort of "expert" in energy.
(Laughter) Now, at the time, I couldn't really have told you the difference between a one-and-a-half-volt AA battery that goes in my kids' toys and a 100-megawatt-hour industrial-scale battery facility that goes in South Australia that could potentially solve their power crisis.
I was now feeling a chronic case of impostor syndrome, (Laughter) and it got truly bizarre.
And I remember thinking to myself, "Shit. I've kind of started something here and I can't really get out.
If I abandon the situation, I'm going to sort of set back renewables in Australia and maybe just look like a complete idiot because of my idiocy on Twitter."
So I thought the only thing I could do was to try not to freeze and to try to learn.
So I spent a week trying to learn everything I could about industrial-scale batteries and the electricity grid and renewables and the economics of all of this and whether this was even a feasible proposal.
I talked to the chief scientist, I talked to the CSIRO, had multiple ministers and premiers trying to give me their side of the story from both sides of the aisle.
I managed to exchange tweets with the prime minister.
I even managed to pull off a passing impression, let's say, of an energy expert on ABC Lateline.
(Laughter) But as a result of all this, South Australia did put out a battery tender, and they had more than 90 applications for that battery tender.
And the national conversation over a period of a few months moved from the sort of theatrical lumps of coal in the parliament to discussing kind of which industrial-scale battery chemistry was the best for building large-scale renewable batteries.
So I think that the important lesson is by that time in my life, I knew well that I was an impostor.
I knew I was miles out of my depth.
But instead of freezing, I tried to learn as much as I could, motivated by my fear of generally looking like an idiot, and tried to turn that into some sort of a force for good.
So one of the things I've learned is that people think successful people don't feel like frauds.
But I think, especially knowing a lot of entrepreneurs, the opposite is more likely to be true.
But the most successful people I know don't question themselves, but they do heavily question, regularly question, their ideas and their knowledge.
They know when the water is way too deep, and they're not afraid to ask for advice.
They don't see that as a bad thing.
And they use that advice to hone those ideas, to improve them and to learn.
And it's OK to be out of your depth sometimes.
I'm frequently out of my depth.
It's OK to be out of your depth.
It's OK to be in a situation where you just can't push the eject button, so long as you don't freeze, so long as you harness the situation, don't be paralyzed and try to turn it into some sort of a force for good.
And it's important that I say "harness" here, because this isn't sort of pop-psychology BS about conquering impostor syndrome for me.
It's merely about being aware of it.
In fact, I'm extremely aware of feeling like an impostor right now, as I'm up here, some sort of pseudo-expert on a feeling that I couldn't even put a name to a few months ago, when I agreed to do this talk.
Which, if you think about it, is kind of the point, isn't it?
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
The first half of the 20th century was an absolute disaster in human affairs, a cataclysm.
We had the First World War, the Great Depression, the Second World War and the rise of the communist nations.
And each one of these forces split the world, tore the world apart, divided the world.
And they threw up walls -- political walls, trade walls, transportation walls, communication walls, iron curtains -- which divided peoples and nations.
It was only in the second half of the 20th century that we slowly began to pull ourselves out of this abyss.
Trade walls began to come tumbling down.
Here are some data on tariffs: starting at 40 percent, coming down to less than 5 percent.
We globalized the world. And what does that mean?
It means that we extended cooperation across national boundaries; we made the world more cooperative.
Transportation walls came tumbling down.
You know in 1950 the typical ship carried 5,000 to 10,000 tons worth of goods.
Today a container ship can carry 150,000 tons; it can be manned with a smaller crew; and unloaded faster than ever before.
Communication walls, I don't have to tell you -- the Internet -- have come tumbling down.
And of course the iron curtains, political walls have come tumbling down.
Now all of this has been tremendous for the world.
Trade has increased.
Here is just a little bit of data.
In 1990, exports from China to the United States: 15 billion dollars.
By 2007: over 300 billion dollars.
And perhaps most remarkably, at the beginning of the 21st century, really for the first time in modern history, growth extended to almost all parts of the world.
So China, I've already mentioned, beginning around 1978, around the time of the death of Mao, growth -- ten percent a year.
Year after year after year, absolutely incredible.
Never before in human history have so many people been raised out of such great poverty as happened in China.
China is the world's greatest anti-poverty program over the last three decades.
India, starting a little bit later, but in 1990, begetting tremendous growth.
Incomes at that time less than $1,000 per year.
And over the next 18 years have almost tripled.
Growth of six percent a year. Absolutely incredible.
Now Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa -- Sub-Saharan Africa has been the area of the world most resistant to growth.
And we can see the tragedy of Africa in the first few bars here.
Growth was negative.
People were actually getting poorer than their parents, and sometimes even poorer than their grandparents had been.
But at the end of the 20th century, the beginning of the 21st century, we saw growth in Africa.
And I think, as you'll see, there's reasons for optimism, because I believe that the best is yet to come.
Now why.
On the cutting edge today it's new ideas which are driving growth.
And by that I mean it's products for which the research and development costs are really high, and the manufacturing costs are low.
More than ever before it is these types of ideas which are driving growth on the cutting edge.
Now ideas have this amazing property.
Thomas Jefferson, I think, really expressed this quite well.
He said, "He who receives an idea from me receives instruction himself, without lessening mine.
As he who lights his candle at mine receives light without darkening me."
Or to put it slightly differently: one apple feeds one man, but an idea can feed the world.
Now this is not new. This is practically not new to TEDsters.
This is practically the model of TED.
But what is new is that the greater function of ideas is going to drive growth even more than ever before.
This provides a reason why trade and globalization are even more important, more powerful than ever before, and are going to increase growth more than ever before.
And to explain why this is so, I have a question.
Suppose that there are two diseases: one of them is rare, the other one is common, but if they are not treated they are equally severe.
If you had to choose, which would you rather have: the common disease or the rare disease?
Common, the common -- I think that's absolutely right, and why? Because there are more drugs to treat common diseases than there are to treat rare diseases.
The reason for this is incentives.
It costs about the same to produce a new drug whether that drug treats 1,000 people, 100,000 people, or a million people.
But the revenues are much greater if the drug treats a million people.
So the incentives are much larger to produce drugs which treat more people.
To put this differently: larger markets save lives.
In this case misery truly does love company.
Now think about the following: if China and India were as rich as the United States is today, the market for cancer drugs would be eight times larger than it is now.
Now we are not there yet, but it is happening.
As other countries become richer the demand for these pharmaceuticals is going to increase tremendously.
And that means an increase incentive to do research and development, which benefits everyone in the world.
Larger markets increase the incentive to produce all kinds of ideas, whether it's software, whether it's a computer chip, whether it's a new design.
For the Hollywood people in the audience, this even explains why action movies have larger budgets than comedies: it's because action movies translate easier into other languages and other cultures, so the market for those movies is larger.
People are willing to invest more, and the budgets are larger.
Alright. Well if larger markets increase the incentive to produce new ideas, how do we maximize that incentive?
It's by having one world market, by globalizing the world.
The way I like to put this is: one idea. Ideas are meant to be shared, so one idea can serve one world, one market.
One idea, one world, one market.
Well how else can we create new ideas?
That's one reason.
Globalize trade.
How else can we create new ideas?
Well, more idea creators.
Now idea creators, they come from all walks of life.
Artists and innovators -- many of the people you've seen on this stage.
I'm going to focus on scientists and engineers because I have some data on that, and I'm a data person.
Now, today, less than one-tenth of one percent of the world's population are scientists and engineers.
(Laughter) The United States has been an idea leader.
A large fraction of those people are in the United States.
But the U.S. is losing its idea leadership.
And for that I am very grateful.
That is a good thing.
It is fortunate that we are becoming less of an idea leader because for too long the United States, and a handful of other developed countries, have shouldered the entire burden of research and development.
But consider the following: if the world as a whole were as wealthy as the United States is now there would be more than five times as many scientists and engineers contributing to ideas which benefit everyone, which are shared by everyone.
I think of the great Indian mathematician, Ramanujan.
How many Ramanujans are there in India today toiling in the fields, barely able to feed themselves, when they could be feeding the world?
Now we're not there yet.
But it is going to happen in this century.
The real tragedy of the last century is this: if you think about the world's population as a giant computer, a massively parallel processor, then the great tragedy has been that billions of our processors have been off line.
But in this century China is coming on line.
India is coming on line.
Africa is coming on line.
We will see an Einstein in Africa in this century.
Here is just some data. This is China.
1996: less than one million new university students in China per year; 2006: over five million.
Now think what this means.
This means we all benefit when another country gets rich.
We should not fear other countries becoming wealthy.
That is something that we should embrace -- a wealthy China, a wealthy India, a wealthy Africa.
We need a greater demand for ideas -- those larger markets I was talking about earlier -- and a greater supply of ideas for the world.
Now you can see some of the reasons why I'm optimistic.
Globalization is increasing the demand for ideas, the incentive to create new ideas.
Investments in education are increasing the supply of new ideas.
In fact if you look at world history you can see some reasons for optimism.
From about the beginnings of humanity to 1500: zero economic growth, nothing.
1500 to 1800: maybe a little bit of economic growth, but less in a century than you expect to see in a year today.
1900s: maybe one percent.
Twentieth century: a little bit over two percent.
Twenty-first century could easily be 3.3, even higher percent.
Even at that rate, by 2100 average GDP per capita in the world will be $200,000.
That's not U.S. GDP per capita, which will be over a million, but world GDP per capita -- $200,000.
That's not that far.
We won't make it.
But some of our grandchildren probably will.
And I should say, I think this is a rather modest prediction.
In Kurzweilian terms this is gloomy.
In Kurzweilian terms I'm like the Eeyore of economic growth.
(Laughter) Alright what about problems?
What about a great depression?
Well let's take a look. Let's take a look at the Great Depression.
Here is GDP per capita from 1900 to 1929.
Now let's imagine that you were an economist in 1929, trying to forecast future growth for the United States, not knowing that the economy was about to go off a cliff, not knowing that we were about to enter the greatest economic disaster certainly in the 20th century.
What would you have predicted, not knowing this?
If you had based your prediction, your forecast on 1900 to 1929 you'd have predicted something like this.
If you'd been a little more optimistic -- say, based upon the Roaring Twenties -- you'd have said this.
So what actually happened?
We went off a cliff but we recovered.
In fact in the second half of the 20th century growth was even higher than anything you would have predicted based upon the first half of the 20th century.
So growth can wash away even what appears to be a great depression.
Alright. What else?
Oil. Oil. This was a big topic.
When I was writing up my notes oil was $140 per barrel.
So people were asking a question. They were saying, "Is China drinking our milkshake?"
(Laughter) And there is some truth to this, in the sense that we have something of a finite resource, and increased growth is going to push up demand for that.
But I think I don't have to tell this audience that a higher price of oil is not necessarily a bad thing.
Moreover, as everyone knows, look -- it's energy, not oil, which counts.
And higher oil prices mean a greater incentive to invest in energy R&amp;D.
You can see this in the data.
As oil prices go up, energy patents go up.
The world is much better equipped to overcome an increase in the price of oil today, than ever in the past, because of what I'm talking about.
One idea, one world, one market.
So I'm optimistic so long as we hew to these two ideas: to keep globalizing world markets, keep extending cooperation across national boundaries, and keep investing in education.
Now the United States has a particularly important role to play in this: to keep our education system globalized, to keep our education system open to students from all over the world, because our education system is the candle that other students come to light their own candles.
Now remember here what Jefferson said.
Jefferson said, "When they come and light their candles at ours, they gain light, and we are not darkened."
But Jefferson wasn't quite right, was he?
Because the truth is, when they light their candles at ours, there is twice as much light available for everyone.
So my view is: Be optimistic.
Spread the ideas. Spread the light.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This machine, which we all have residing in our skulls, reminds me of an aphorism, of a comment of Woody Allen to ask about what is the very best thing to have within your skull.
And it's this machine.
And it's constructed for change. It's all about change.
It confers on us the ability to do things tomorrow that we can't do today, things today that we couldn't do yesterday.
And of course it's born stupid.
